---
path: '/DeepWork'
date: '2019-12-29'
title: 'Deep Work'
title_full: 'Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World'
book_author: 'Cal Newport'
author: 'RMS'
tags: ['book-notes']
language: 'english'
type: 'BOOK'
---

Deep Work: Professional activities performed in a state of distraction-free concentration that push
your cognitive capabilities to their limit. These efforts create new value, improve your skill, and
are hard to replicate. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
2, loc. 31-33 that the state of mental strain that accompanies deep work is also necessary to
improve your abilities. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
3, loc. 34-35 the state of mental strain that accompanies deep work is also necessary to improve
your abilities. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 3, loc.
34-35 deep work is also necessary to improve your abilities. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 3, loc. 35-35 The reason knowledge workers are losing
their familiarity with deep work is well established: network tools. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 5, loc. 65-65 fragmented attention cannot accommodate
deep work, which requires long periods of uninterrupted thinking. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 5, loc. 70-71 Shallow Work: Noncognitively demanding,
logistical-style tasks, often performed while distracted. These efforts tend to not create much new
value in the world and are easy to replicate. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 5, loc. 73-75 Larger efforts that would be well served by deep thinking, such
as forming a new business strategy or writing an important grant application, get fragmented into
distracted dashes that produce muted quality. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 5, loc. 77-78 there’s increasing evidence that this shift toward the shallow
is not a choice that can be easily reversed. Spend enough time in a state of frenetic shallowness
and you permanently Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 6,
loc. 78-80 there’s increasing evidence that this shift toward the shallow is not a choice that can
be easily reversed. Spend enough time in a state of frenetic shallowness and you permanently reduce
your capacity to perform deep work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 6, loc. 78-80 Our work culture’s shift toward the shallow (whether you think
it’s philosophically good or bad) is exposing a massive economic and personal opportunity for the
few who recognize the potential of resisting this trend and prioritizing depth—an Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 7, loc. 94-96 Deep work is not some
nostalgic affectation of writers and early-twentieth-century philosophers. It’s instead a skill that
has great value today. There are two Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 10, loc. 148-149 Deep work is not some nostalgic affectation of writers and
early-twentieth-century philosophers. It’s instead a skill that has great value today. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 10, loc. 148-149 two reasons for
this value. The first has to do with learning. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 10, loc. 149-150 two reasons for this value. The first has to do with
learning. We have an information economy that’s dependent on complex systems that change rapidly.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 10, loc. 149-150 To
remain valuable in our economy, therefore, you must master the art of quickly learning complicated
things. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 10, loc.
152-153 To remain valuable in our economy, therefore, you must master the art of quickly learning
complicated things. This task requires deep work. If you don’t cultivate this ability, you’re likely
to fall behind as technology advances. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 10, loc. 152-154 second reason that deep work is valuable is because the
impacts of the digital network revolution cut both ways. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 11, loc. 154-155 second reason that deep work is valuable is
because the impacts of the digital network revolution cut both ways. If you can create something
useful, its reachable audience (e.g., Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 11, loc. 154-155 second reason that deep work is valuable is because the
impacts of the digital network revolution cut both ways. If you can create something useful, its
reachable audience (e.g., employers or customers) is essentially limitless—which greatly magnifies
your reward. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 11, loc.
154-156 second reason that deep work is valuable is because the impacts of the digital network
revolution cut both ways. If you can create something useful, its reachable audience (e.g.,
employers or customers) is essentially limitless—which greatly magnifies your reward. On the other
hand, if what you’re producing is mediocre, then you’re in trouble, as it’s too easy for your
audience to find a better alternative online. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 11, loc. 154-157 Deep work is not, in other words, an old-fashioned skill
falling into irrelevance. It’s instead a crucial ability for anyone looking to move ahead in a
globally competitive information economy that tends to chew up and spit out those who aren’t earning
their keep. The real rewards are reserved not for those Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 11, loc. 163-165 Deep work is not, in other words, an
old-fashioned skill falling into irrelevance. It’s instead a crucial ability for anyone looking to
move ahead in a globally competitive information economy that tends to chew up and spit out those
who aren’t earning their keep. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 11, loc. 163-165 Deep work is not, in other words, an old-fashioned skill falling into
irrelevance. It’s instead a crucial ability for anyone looking to move ahead in a globally
competitive information economy that tends to chew up and spit out those who aren’t earning their
keep. The real rewards are reserved not for those who are comfortable using Facebook (a shallow
task, easily replicated), but instead for those who are comfortable building the innovative
distributed systems that run the service (a decidedly deep task, hard to replicate). Deep work is so
important that we might consider it, to use the phrasing of business writer Eric Barker, “the
superpower of the 21st century.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 11, loc. 163-168 The Deep Work Hypothesis: The ability to perform deep work is becoming
increasingly rare at exactly the same time it is becoming increasingly valuable in our economy. As a
consequence, the few who cultivate this skill, and then make it the core of their working life, will
thrive. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 12, loc.
171-174 As Brynjolfsson and McAfee emphasize, this Great Restructuring is not driving down all jobs
but is instead dividing them. Though an increasing number of people will lose in this new economy as
their skill becomes automatable or easily outsourced, there are others who will not only survive,
but thrive—becoming more valued (and therefore more rewarded) than before. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 17, loc. 246-249 what makes Brynjolfsson and
McAfee’s analysis particularly useful is that they proceed to identify three specific groups that
will fall on the lucrative side of this divide and reap a disproportionate amount of the benefits of
the Intelligent Machine Age. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 17, loc. 250-252 The High-Skilled Workers Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 17, loc. 254-254 Advances such as robotics and voice recognition
are automating many low-skilled positions, but as these economists emphasize, “other technologies
like data visualization, analytics, high speed communications, and rapid prototyping have augmented
the contributions of more abstract and data-driven reasoning, increasing the values of these jobs.”
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 17, loc. 255-257
Advances such as robotics and voice recognition are automating many low-skilled positions, but as
these economists emphasize, “other technologies like data visualization, analytics, high speed
communications, and rapid prototyping have augmented the contributions of more abstract and
data-driven reasoning, increasing the values of these jobs.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 17, loc. 255-257 Advances such as robotics and voice
recognition are automating many low-skilled positions, but as these economists emphasize, “other
technologies like data visualization, analytics, high speed communications, and rapid prototyping
have augmented the contributions of more abstract and data-driven reasoning, increasing the values
of these jobs.” In other words, those with the oracular ability to work with and tease valuable
results out of increasingly complex machines will thrive. Tyler Cowen summarizes this reality more
bluntly: “The key question will be: are you good at working with intelligent machines or not?” Nate
Silver, of course, with his comfort in feeding data into large databases, then siphoning it out into
his mysterious Monte Carlo simulations, is the epitome of the high-skilled worker. Intelligent
machines are not an obstacle to Silver’s success, but instead provide its precondition. The
Superstars The ace programmer David Heinemeier Hansson provides an example of the second group that
Brynjolfsson and McAfee predict will thrive in our new economy: “superstars.” High-speed Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 17, loc. 255-264 those with
the oracular ability to work with and tease valuable results out of increasingly complex machines
will thrive. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 17, loc.
258-258 those with the oracular ability to work with and tease valuable results out of increasingly
complex machines will thrive. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 17, loc. 258-258 “The key question will be: are you good at working with intelligent
machines or not?” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 17,
loc. 259-259 “The key question will be: are you good at working with intelligent machines or not?”
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 17, loc. 259-259 The
Superstars Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 18, loc.
262-262 The Superstars Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
18, loc. 262-262 High-speed data networks and collaboration tools like e-mail and virtual meeting
software have destroyed regionalism in many sectors Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 18, loc. 264-264 High-speed data networks and collaboration tools
like e-mail and virtual meeting software have destroyed regionalism in many sectors of knowledge
work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 18, loc. 264-265
Once the talent market is made universally accessible, those at the peak of the market thrive while
the rest suffer. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 18,
loc. 271-272 In a seminal 1981 paper, the economist Sherwin Rosen worked out the mathematics behind
these “winner-take-all” markets. One of his key insights was to explicitly model talent—labeled,
innocuously, with the variable q in his formulas—as a factor with “imperfect substitution,” Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 18, loc. 272-274 “Hearing a
succession of mediocre singers does not add up to a single outstanding performance.” Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 18, loc. 274-275 talent is not a
commodity you can buy in bulk and combine to reach the needed levels: There’s a premium to being the
best. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 18, loc. 275-276
if you’re in a marketplace where the consumer has access to all performers, and everyone’s q value
is clear, the consumer will choose the very best. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 18, loc. 276-277 if you’re in a marketplace where the consumer has access
to all performers, and everyone’s q value is clear, the consumer will choose the very best. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 18, loc. 276-277 if you’re
in a marketplace where the consumer has access to all performers, and everyone’s q value is clear,
the consumer will choose the very best. Even if the talent advantage of the best is small compared
to the next rung down on the skill ladder, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 18, loc. 276-278 The Owners Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 19, loc. 285-286 those with capital to invest in the new technologies
that are driving the Great Restructuring. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 19, loc. 287-287 we’ve understood since Marx, access to capital provides
massive advantages. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 19,
loc. 287-288 bargaining theory, a key component in standard economic thinking, argues that when
money is made through the combination of capital investment and labor, the rewards are returned,
roughly speaking, proportional to the input. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 19, loc. 292-293 bargaining theory, a key component in standard economic
thinking, argues that when money is made through the combination of capital investment and labor,
the rewards are returned, roughly speaking, proportional to the input. As digital technology reduces
the need for labor in many industries, the proportion of the rewards returned to those who Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 19, loc. 292-294 bargaining
theory, a key component in standard economic thinking, argues that when money is made through the
combination of capital investment and labor, the rewards are returned, roughly speaking,
proportional to the input. As digital technology reduces the need for labor in many industries, the
proportion of the rewards returned to those who own the intelligent machines is growing. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 19, loc. 292-294 Current
economic thinking, as I’ve surveyed, argues that the unprecedented growth and impact of technology
are creating a massive restructuring of our economy. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 20, loc. 299-300 Current economic thinking, as I’ve surveyed,
argues that the unprecedented growth and impact of technology are creating a massive restructuring
of our economy. In this new economy, three groups will have a particular advantage: those who can
work well and creatively with intelligent machines, those who are the best at what they do, and
those with access to capital. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 20, loc. 299-302 How to Become a Winner in the New Economy Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 21, loc. 309-310 two groups that are poised to thrive
and that I claim are accessible: those who can work creatively with intelligent machines and those
who are stars in their field. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 21, loc. 310-311 What’s the secret to landing in these lucrative sectors of the widening
digital divide? I argue that the following two core abilities are crucial. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 21, loc. 311-312 Two Core Abilities for
Thriving in the New Economy 1. The ability to quickly master hard things. 2. The ability to produce
at an elite level, in terms of both quality and speed. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 21, loc. 313-315 intelligent machines are complicated and hard to
master._ To join the group of those who can work well with these machines, therefore, requires that
you hone your ability to master hard things. And because these technologies change rapidly, this
process of mastering hard things never ends: You must be able to do it quickly, again and again. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 22, loc. 335-337 If you
can’t learn, you can’t thrive. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 23, loc. 342-342 the second core ability from the list shown earlier: producing at an
elite level. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 23, loc.
342-343 the second core ability from the list shown earlier: producing at an elite level. If you
want to become a superstar, mastering the relevant skills is necessary, but not sufficient. You must
then transform that latent potential into tangible results that people value. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 23, loc. 342-344 This ability to produce
also applies to those looking to master intelligent machines. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 23, loc. 347-347 If you don’t produce, you won’t
thrive—no Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 23, loc.
351-351 If you don’t produce, you won’t thrive—no matter how skilled or talented you are. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 23, loc. 351-351 How does
one cultivate these core abilities? It’s here that we arrive at a central thesis of this book: The
two core abilities just described depend on your ability to perform deep work. If you haven’t
mastered this foundational skill, you’ll struggle to learn hard things or produce at an elite level.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 23, loc. 353-355 Deep
Work Helps You Quickly Learn Hard Things Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 24, loc. 358-358 “Let your mind become a lens, thanks to the converging rays
of attention; let your soul be all intent on whatever it is that is established in your mind as a
dominant, wholly absorbing idea.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 24, loc. 359-360 To learn requires intense concentration. This idea turns out to be ahead
of its time. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 24, loc.
368-368 To learn requires intense concentration. This idea turns out to be ahead of its time. In
reflecting on the life of the mind in the 1920s, Sertillanges uncovered a fact about mastering
cognitively demanding tasks that would take academia another seven decades to formalize. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 24, loc. 368-369 Ericsson
opens his seminal paper on the topic with a powerful claim: “We deny that these differences [between
expert performers and normal adults] are immutable… Instead, we argue that the differences between
expert performers and normal adults reflect a life-long period of deliberate effort to improve
performance in a specific domain.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 25, loc. 373-376 To master a cognitively demanding task requires this specific form of
practice—there are few exceptions made for natural talent. (On this point too, Sertillanges seems to
have been ahead of his time, arguing in The Intellectual Life, “Men of genius themselves were great
only by bringing all their power to bear on the point on which they had decided to show their full
measure.” Ericsson couldn’t have said it better.) Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 25, loc. 379-382 what deliberate practice actually requires. Its core
components are usually identified as follows: (1) your attention is focused tightly on a specific
skill you’re trying to improve or an idea you’re trying to master; (2) you receive feedback so you
can correct your approach to keep your attention exactly where it’s most productive. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 25, loc. 382-385 deliberate practice
cannot exist alongside distraction, and that it instead requires uninterrupted concentration. As
Ericsson emphasizes, “Diffused attention is almost antithetical to the focused attention required by
deliberate practice” (emphasis mine). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 26, loc. 385-387 neuroscientists have been exploring the physical mechanisms
that drive people’s improvements on hard tasks. As the journalist Daniel Coyle surveys in his 2009
book, The Talent Code, these scientists increasingly believe the answer includes myelin—a layer of
fatty tissue that grows around neurons, acting like an insulator that allows the cells to fire
faster and cleaner. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 26,
loc. 389-392 neuroscientists have been exploring the physical mechanisms that drive people’s
improvements on hard tasks. As the journalist Daniel Coyle surveys in his 2009 book, The Talent
Code, these scientists increasingly believe the answer includes myelin—a layer of fatty tissue that
grows around neurons, acting like an insulator that allows the cells to fire faster and cleaner. To
understand the role of myelin in improvement, keep in mind that skills, be they intellectual or
physical, eventually reduce down to brain circuits. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 26, loc. 389-393 neuroscientists have been exploring the physical
mechanisms that drive people’s improvements on hard tasks. As the journalist Daniel Coyle surveys in
his 2009 book, The Talent Code, these scientists increasingly believe the answer includes myelin—a
layer of fatty tissue that grows around neurons, acting like an insulator that allows the cells to
fire faster and cleaner. To understand the role of myelin in improvement, keep in mind that skills,
be they intellectual or physical, eventually reduce down to brain circuits. This new science of
performance argues that you get better at a skill as you develop more myelin around the relevant
neurons, allowing the corresponding circuit to fire more effortlessly and effectively. To be great
at something is to be well myelinated. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 26, loc. 389-394 By focusing intensely on a specific skill, you’re forcing the
specific relevant circuit to fire, again and again, in isolation. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 26, loc. 396-396 By focusing intensely on a specific
skill, you’re forcing the specific relevant circuit to fire, again and again, in isolation. This
repetitive use of a specific circuit triggers cells called oligodendrocytes to begin wrapping layers
of myelin around the neurons in the circuits—effectively cementing the skill. The reason, therefore,
why it’s important to focus intensely on the task at hand while avoiding distraction is because this
is the only way to isolate the relevant neural circuit enough to trigger useful myelination. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 26, loc. 396-399 To learn
hard things quickly, you must focus intensely without distraction. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 27, loc. 404-404 To learn hard things quickly, you must
focus intensely without distraction. To learn, in other words, is an act of deep work. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 27, loc. 404-405 To learn hard
things quickly, you must focus intensely without distraction. To learn, in other words, is an act of
deep work. If you’re comfortable going deep, you’ll be comfortable mastering the increasingly
complex systems and skills needed to thrive in our economy. If you instead remain one of the many
for whom depth is uncomfortable and distraction ubiquitous, you shouldn’t expect these systems and
skills to come easily to you. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 27, loc. 404-407 Deep Work Helps You Produce at an Elite Level Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 27, loc. 407-407 there’s one idea in particular
that seems central to his method: the batching of hard but important intellectual work into long,
uninterrupted stretches. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 28, loc. 425-426 by consolidating his work into intense and uninterrupted pulses, he’s
leveraging the following law of productivity: High-Quality Work Produced = (Time Spent) x (Intensity
of Focus) Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 29, loc.
438-440 By maximizing his intensity when he works, he maximizes the results he produces per unit of
time spent working. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 29,
loc. 441-441 The best students understood the role intensity plays in productivity and therefore
went out of their way to maximize their concentration—radically reducing the time required to
prepare for tests or write papers, without diminishing the quality of their results. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 30, loc. 446-448 when you switch
from some Task A to another Task B, your attention doesn’t immediately follow—a residue of your
attention remains stuck thinking about the original task. This residue gets especially thick if your
work on Task A was unbounded and of low intensity before you switched, but even if you finish Task A
before moving on, your attention remains divided for a while. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 30, loc. 455-458 “People experiencing attention residue
after switching tasks are likely to demonstrate poor performance on that next task,” and the more
intense the residue, the worse the performance. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 31, loc. 463-464 The concept of attention residue helps explain why the
intensity formula is true and therefore helps explain Grant’s productivity. By working on a single
hard task for a long time without switching, Grant minimizes the negative impact of attention
residue from his other obligations, allowing him to maximize performance on this one task. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 31, loc. 465-467 the
attention residue concept is still telling because it implies that the common habit of working in a
state of semi-distraction is potentially devastating to your performance. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 31, loc. 470-471 To produce at your peak level
you need to work for extended periods with full concentration on a single task free from
distraction. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 32, loc.
477-477 To produce at your peak level you need to work for extended periods with full concentration
on a single task free from distraction. Put another way, the type of work that optimizes your
performance is deep work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 32, loc. 477-478 Unless your talent and skills absolutely dwarf those of your competition, the
deep workers among them will outproduce you. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 32, loc. 479-480 Jack Dorsey is important to our discussion because he’s an
exemplar of a group we cannot ignore: individuals who thrive without depth. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 33, loc. 496-496 If deep work is so important,
why are there distracted people who do well? Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 33, loc. 497-498 Jack Dorsey’s success without depth is common at this elite
level of management. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
33, loc. 504-505 Jack Dorsey’s success without depth is common at this elite level of management.
Once we’ve stipulated this reality, we must then step back to remind ourselves that it doesn’t
undermine the general value of depth. Why? Because the necessity of distraction in these executives’
work lives is highly specific to their particular jobs. A good chief executive is essentially a
hard-to-automate decision engine, not unlike IBM’s Jeopardy!-playing Watson system. They have built
up a hard-won repository of experience and have honed and proved an instinct for their market. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 33, loc. 504-508 Jack
Dorsey’s success without depth is common at this elite level of management. Once we’ve stipulated
this reality, we must then step back to remind ourselves that it doesn’t undermine the general value
of depth. Why? Because the necessity of distraction in these executives’ work lives is highly
specific to their particular jobs. A good chief executive is essentially a hard-to-automate decision
engine, not unlike IBM’s Jeopardy!-playing Watson system. They have built up a hard-won repository
of experience and have honed and proved an instinct for their market. They’re then presented inputs
throughout the day—in the form of e-mails, meetings, site visits, and the like—that they must
process and act on. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 33,
loc. 504-509 Jack Dorsey’s success without depth is common at this elite level of management. Once
we’ve stipulated this reality, we must then step back to remind ourselves that it doesn’t undermine
the general value of depth. Why? Because the necessity of distraction in these executives’ work
lives is highly specific to their particular jobs. A good chief executive is essentially a
hard-to-automate decision engine, not unlike IBM’s Jeopardy!-playing Watson system. They have built
up a hard-won repository of experience and have honed and proved an instinct for their market.
They’re then presented inputs throughout the day—in the form of e-mails, meetings, site visits, and
the like—that they must process and act on. To ask a CEO to spend four hours thinking deeply about a
single problem is a waste of what makes him or her valuable. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 33, loc. 504-510 if you’re a high-level executive at a
major company, you probably don’t need the advice in the pages that follow. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 34, loc. 512-513 if you’re a high-level
executive at a major company, you probably don’t need the advice in the pages that follow. On the
other hand, it also tells us that you cannot extrapolate the approach of these executives to other
jobs. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 34, loc. 512-513
if you’re a high-level executive at a major company, you probably don’t need the advice in the pages
that follow. On the other hand, it also tells us that you cannot extrapolate the approach of these
executives to other jobs. The fact that Dorsey encourages interruption or Kerry Trainor checks his
e-mail constantly doesn’t mean that you’ll share their success if you follow suit: Their behaviors
are characteristic of their specific roles as corporate officers. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 34, loc. 512-515 you cannot extrapolate the approach of
these executives to other jobs. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 34, loc. 513-513 Deep work is not the only skill valuable in our economy, and it’s
possible to do well without fostering this ability, but the niches where this is advisable are
increasingly rare. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 35,
loc. 530-532 Deep work is not the only skill valuable in our economy, and it’s possible to do well
without fostering this ability, but the niches where this is advisable are increasingly rare. Unless
you have strong evidence that distraction is important for your specific profession, you’re best
served, for the reasons argued earlier in this chapter, by giving serious consideration to depth.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 35, loc. 530-533 Open
offices, for example, might create more opportunities for collaboration,_ but they do so at the cost
of “massive distraction,” to quote the results of experiments conducted for a British TV special
titled The Secret Life of Office Buildings. “If you are just getting into some work and a phone goes
off in the background, it ruins what you are concentrating on,” said the neuroscientist who ran the
experiments for the show. “Even though you are not aware Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 37, loc. 561-565 big trends in business today actively decrease
people’s ability to perform deep work, even though the benefits promised by these trends (e.g.,
increased serendipity, faster responses to requests, and more exposure) Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 38, loc. 578-579 big trends in business today
actively decrease people’s ability to perform deep work, even though the benefits promised by these
trends (e.g., increased serendipity, faster responses to requests, and more exposure) are arguably
dwarfed by the benefits that flow from a commitment to deep work (e.g., the ability to learn hard
things fast and produce at an elite level). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 38, loc. 578-580 Even though we abstractly accept that distraction has costs
and depth has value, these impacts, as Tom Cochran discovered, are difficult to measure. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 40, loc. 603-604 as
knowledge work makes more complex demands of the labor force, it becomes harder to measure the value
of an individual’s efforts. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 40, loc. 605-606 Thomas Piketty made this point explicit in his study of the extreme growth of
executive salaries. The enabling assumption driving his argument is that “it is objectively
difficult to measure individual contributions to a firm’s output.” In the absence of such measures,
irrational outcomes, such as executive salaries way out of proportion to the executive’s marginal
productivity, can occur. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 40, loc. 606-609 it’s increasingly difficult to measure individuals’ contributions is generally
considered, to quote one of his critics, “undoubtedly true.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 40, loc. 609-610 We should not, therefore, expect the
bottom-line impact Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 40,
loc. 611-611 We should not, therefore, expect the bottom-line impact of depth-destroying behaviors
to be easily detected. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
40, loc. 611-611 such metrics fall into an opaque region resistant to easy measurement—a region I
call the metric black hole. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 40, loc. 611-612 The Principle of Least Resistance Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 41, loc. 620-621 culture of connectivity, where one is expected
to read and respond to e-mails (and related communication) quickly. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 41, loc. 622-623 The Principle of Least Resistance:
In a business setting, without clear feedback on the impact of various behaviors to the bottom line,
we will tend toward behaviors that are easiest in the moment. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 42, loc. 638-640 why cultures of connectivity persist,
the answer, according to our principle, is because it’s easier. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 42, loc. 640-641 two big reasons why this is true. The
first concerns responsiveness to your needs. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 42, loc. 641-642 two big reasons why this is true. The first concerns
responsiveness to your needs. If you work in an environment where you can get an answer to a
question or a specific piece of information immediately when the need arises, this makes your life
easier—at least, in the moment. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 42, loc. 641-643 two big reasons why this is true. The first concerns responsiveness to
your needs. If you work in an environment where you can get an answer to a question or a specific
piece of information immediately when the need arises, this makes your life easier—at least, in the
moment. If you couldn’t count on this quick response time you’d instead have to do more advance
planning for your work, be more organized, and be prepared to put things aside for a while and turn
your attention elsewhere while waiting for what you requested. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 42, loc. 641-645 two big reasons why this is true. The
first concerns responsiveness to your needs. If you work in an environment where you can get an
answer to a question or a specific piece of information immediately when the need arises, this makes
your life easier—at least, in the moment. If you couldn’t count on this quick response time you’d
instead have to do more advance planning for your work, be more organized, and be prepared to put
things aside for a while and turn your attention elsewhere while waiting for what you requested. All
of this would make the day to day of your working life harder (even if it produced more satisfaction
and a better outcome in the long term). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 42, loc. 641-646 The second reason that a culture of connectivity makes life
easier is that it creates an environment where it becomes acceptable to run your day out of your
inbox—responding to the latest missive with alacrity while others pile up behind it, all the while
feeling satisfyingly productive Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 43, loc. 648-650 If e-mail were to move to the periphery of your workday, you’d be
required to deploy a more thoughtful approach to figuring out what you should be working on and for
how long. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 43, loc.
650-651 in the absence of metrics, most people fall back on what’s easiest. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 43, loc. 656-657 consider the common practice
of setting up regularly occurring meetings for projects. These meetings tend to pile up and fracture
schedules to the point where sustained focus during the day becomes impossible. Why do they persist?
They’re easier. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 43,
loc. 657-659 standing meetings become a simple (but blunt) form of personal organization. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 43, loc. 659-659 standing
meetings become a simple (but blunt) form of personal organization. Instead of trying to manage
their time and obligations themselves, they let the impending meeting each week force them to take
some action on a given project and more generally provide a highly visible simulacrum of progress.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 43, loc. 659-661 why
are these easily avoidable and time-sucking e-mails so common? From the sender’s perspective,
they’re easier. It’s a way to clear something out of their inbox—at least, temporarily—with a
minimum amount of energy invested. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 44, loc. 665-666 why are these easily avoidable and time-sucking e-mails so common? From
the sender’s perspective, they’re easier. It’s a way to clear something out of their inbox—at least,
temporarily—with a minimum amount of energy invested. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 44, loc. 665-666 The Principle of Least Resistance, protected
from scrutiny by the metric black hole, supports work cultures that save us from the short-term
discomfort of concentration and planning, at the expense of long-term satisfaction and the
production of real value. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 44, loc. 667-668 The Principle of Least Resistance, protected from scrutiny by the metric black
hole, supports work cultures that save us from the short-term discomfort of concentration and
planning, at the expense of long-term satisfaction and the production of real value. By doing so,
this principle drives us toward shallow work in an economy that increasingly rewards depth. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 44, loc. 667-669 Busyness
as a Proxy for Productivity Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 44, loc. 671-671 Richard Feynman explaining in an interview one of his less orthodox
productivity strategies: To do real good physics work, you do need absolute solid lengths of time…
it needs a lot of concentration… if you have a job administrating anything, you don’t have the time.
So I have invented another myth for myself: that I’m irresponsible. I’m actively irresponsible. I
tell everyone I don’t do anything. If anyone asks me to be on a committee for admissions, “no,” I
tell them: I’m irresponsible. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 45, loc. 680-684 Richard Feynman explaining in an interview one of his less orthodox
productivity strategies: To do real good physics work, you do need absolute solid lengths of time…
it needs a lot of concentration… if you have a job administrating anything, you don’t have the time.
So I have invented another myth for myself: that I’m irresponsible. I’m actively irresponsible. I
tell everyone I don’t do anything. If anyone asks me to be on a committee for admissions, “no,” I
tell them: I’m irresponsible. Feynman was adamant in avoiding administrative duties because he knew
they would only decrease his ability to do the one thing that mattered most in his professional
life: “to do real good physics work.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 45, loc. 680-686 Clarity about what matters provides clarity about what does
not. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 45, loc. 687-688
“Managers themselves inhabit a bewildering psychic landscape, and are made anxious by the vague
imperatives they must answer to.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 45, loc. 690-691 As Crawford describes in his 2009 ode to the trades, Shop Class as
Soulcraft, he quit his job as a Washington, D.C., think tank director to open a motorcycle repair
shop exactly to escape this bewilderment. The feeling of taking a broken machine, struggling with
it, then eventually enjoying a tangible indication that he had succeeded (the bike driving out of
the shop under its own power) provides a concrete sense of accomplishment he struggled to replicate
when his day revolved vaguely around reports and communications strategies. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 46, loc. 692-696 overcome this gap, many seem
to be turning back to the last time when productivity was more universally observable: the
industrial age. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 46,
loc. 698-699 overcome this gap, many seem to be turning back to the last time when productivity was
more universally observable: the industrial age. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 46, loc. 698-699 the last time when productivity was more universally
observable: the industrial age. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 46, loc. 699-699 Knowledge workers, I’m arguing, are tending toward increasingly visible
busyness because they lack a better way to demonstrate their value. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 46, loc. 705-706 Busyness as Proxy for Productivity:
In the absence of clear indicators of what it means to be productive and valuable in their jobs,
many knowledge workers turn back toward an industrial indicator Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 47, loc. 706-708 Busyness as Proxy for Productivity: In
the absence of clear indicators of what it means to be productive and valuable in their jobs, many
knowledge workers turn back toward an industrial indicator of Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 47, loc. 706-708 Busyness as Proxy for Productivity: In
the absence of clear indicators of what it means to be productive and valuable in their jobs, many
knowledge workers turn back toward an industrial indicator of productivity: doing lots of stuff in a
visible manner. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 47,
loc. 706-708 If you’re using busyness as a proxy for productivity, then these behaviors can seem
crucial for convincing yourself and others that you’re doing your job well. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 47, loc. 712-713 Knowledge work is not an
assembly line, and extracting value from information is an activity that’s Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 47, loc. 718-719 Knowledge work is not an
assembly line, and extracting value from information is an activity that’s often at odds with
busyness, not supported by it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 47, loc. 718-719 We could, of course, eliminate this anachronistic commitment to busyness
if we could easily demonstrate its negative impact on the bottom line, but the metric black hole
enters the scene at this point and prevents such clarity. This potent mixture of job ambiguity and
lack of metrics to measure the effectiveness of different strategies allows behavior that can seem
ridiculous when viewed objectively to thrive in the increasingly bewildering psychic landscape of
our daily work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 48,
loc. 722-726 “Technopoly eliminates alternatives to itself in precisely the way Aldous Huxley
outlined in Brave New World,” he argued in his 1993 book on the topic. “It does not make them
illegal. It does not make them immoral. It does not even make them unpopular. It makes them
invisible and therefore irrelevant.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 49, loc. 746-748 In Morozov’s critique, we’ve made “the Internet” synonymous
with the revolutionary future of business and government. To make your company more like “the
Internet” is to be with the times, and to ignore these trends is to be the proverbial buggy-whip
maker in an automotive age. We no longer see Internet tools as products released by for-profit
companies, funded by investors hoping to make a return, and run by twentysomethings who are often
making things up as they go along. We’re instead quick to idolize these digital doodads as a
signifier of progress and a harbinger of a (dare I say, brave) new world. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 50, loc. 754-758 Deep work is at a severe
disadvantage in a technopoly because it builds on values like quality, craftsmanship, and mastery
that are decidedly old-fashioned and nontechnological. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 51, loc. 772-773 Deep work is at a severe disadvantage in a
technopoly because it builds on values like quality, craftsmanship, and mastery that are decidedly
old-fashioned and nontechnological. Even worse, to support deep work often requires the rejection of
much of what is new and high-tech. Deep work is exiled in favor of more distracting high-tech
behaviors, like the professional use of social media, not because the former is empirically inferior
to the latter. Indeed, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
51, loc. 772-775 Deep work is at a severe disadvantage in a technopoly because it builds on values
like quality, craftsmanship, and mastery that are decidedly old-fashioned and nontechnological. Even
worse, to support deep work often requires the rejection of much of what is new and high-tech. Deep
work is exiled in favor of more distracting high-tech behaviors, like the professional use of social
media, not because the former is empirically inferior to the latter. Indeed, if we had hard metrics
relating the impact of these behaviors on the bottom line, our current technopoly would likely
crumble. But the metric Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
51, loc. 772-776 Deep work is at a severe disadvantage in a technopoly because it builds on values
like quality, craftsmanship, and mastery that are decidedly old-fashioned and nontechnological. Even
worse, to support deep work often requires the rejection of much of what is new and high-tech. Deep
work is exiled in favor of more distracting high-tech behaviors, like the professional use of social
media, not because the former is empirically inferior to the latter. Indeed, if we had hard metrics
relating the impact of these behaviors on the bottom line, our current technopoly would likely
crumble. But the metric black hole prevents such clarity and allows us instead to elevate all things
Internet into Morozov’s feared “uber-ideology.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 51, loc. 772-777 Bad for Business. Good for You. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 51, loc. 779-779 deep work is hard and shallow
work is easier, that in the absence of clear goals for your job, the visible busyness that surrounds
shallow work becomes self-preserving, and that our culture has developed a belief that if a behavior
relates to “the Internet,” then it’s good—regardless of its impact on our ability to produce
valuable things. All of these trends are enabled by the difficulty of directly measuring the value
of depth or the cost of ignoring it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 51, loc. 781-784 deep work is hard and shallow work is easier, that in the
absence of clear goals for your job, the visible busyness that surrounds shallow work becomes
self-preserving, and that our culture has developed a belief that if a behavior relates to “the
Internet,” then it’s good—regardless of its impact on our ability to produce valuable things. All of
these trends are enabled by the difficulty of directly measuring the value of depth or the cost of
ignoring it. If you believe in the value of depth, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 51, loc. 781-785 Assuming the trends outlined here continue, depth will
become increasingly rare and therefore increasingly valuable. Having just established that there’s
nothing fundamentally flawed about deep work and nothing fundamentally necessary about the
distracting behaviors that displace it, you can therefore continue with confidence with the ultimate
goal of this book: to systematically develop your personal ability to go deep—and by doing so, reap
great rewards. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 52, loc.
787-790 Assuming the trends outlined here continue, depth will become increasingly rare and
therefore increasingly valuable. Having just established that there’s nothing fundamentally flawed
about deep work and nothing fundamentally necessary about the distracting behaviors that displace
it, you can therefore continue with confidence with the ultimate goal of this book: to
systematically develop your personal ability to go deep—and by doing so, reap great rewards. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 52, loc. 787-790 “The
satisfactions of manifesting oneself concretely in the world through manual competence have been
known to make a man quiet and easy,” explains Matthew Crawford. And we believe him. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 54, loc. 819-820 Craftsmen like
Furrer tackle professional challenges that are simple to define but difficult to execute—a useful
imbalance when seeking purpose. Knowledge work exchanges this clarity for ambiguity. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 54, loc. 821-822 Craftsmen like
Furrer tackle professional challenges that are simple to define but difficult to execute—a useful
imbalance when seeking purpose. Knowledge work exchanges this clarity for ambiguity. It can be hard
to define exactly what a given knowledge worker does and how it differs from another: On our worst
days, it can seem that all knowledge work boils down to the same exhausting roil of e-mails and
PowerPoint, with only the charts used in the slides differentiating one career from another. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 54, loc. 821-824 Knowledge
work exchanges this clarity for ambiguity. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 54, loc. 822-822 “The world of information superhighways and cyber space has
left me rather cold and disenchanted.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 54, loc. 825-825 Depth-destroying behaviors such as immediate e-mail responses
and an active social media presence are lauded, while avoidance of these trends generates suspicion.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 54, loc. 828-829 In the
sections ahead, I’ll make three arguments to support this claim. These arguments roughly follow a
trajectory from the conceptually narrow to broad: starting with a neurological perspective, moving
to the psychological, and ending with the philosophical. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 55, loc. 833-834 The thesis of this final chapter in Part 1,
therefore, is that a deep life is not just economically lucrative, but also a life well Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 55, loc. 836-837 The thesis of this
final chapter in Part 1, therefore, is that a deep life is not just economically lucrative, but also
a life well lived. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 55,
loc. 836-837 Neurological Argument for Depth Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 55, loc. 837-838 A Neurological Argument for Depth Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 55, loc. 837-838 Like fingers pointing to the
moon, other diverse disciplines from anthropology to education, behavioral economics to family
counseling, similarly suggest that the skillful management of attention is the sine qua non of the
good life and the key to improving virtually every aspect of your experience. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 56, loc. 847-849 We tend to place a lot
of emphasis on our circumstances, assuming that what happens to us (or fails to happen) determines
how we feel. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 56, loc.
850-851 We tend to place a lot of emphasis on our circumstances, assuming that what happens to us
(or fails to happen) determines how we feel. From this perspective, the small-scale details of how
you spend your day aren’t that important, because what matters are the large-scale outcomes, such as
whether or not you get a promotion or move to that nicer apartment. According to Gallagher, decades
of research contradict this understanding. Our brains instead construct our worldview based on what
we pay attention Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 56,
loc. 850-854 We tend to place a lot of emphasis on our circumstances, assuming that what happens to
us (or fails to happen) determines how we feel. From this perspective, the small-scale details of
how you spend your day aren’t that important, because what matters are the large-scale outcomes,
such as whether or not you get a promotion or move to that nicer apartment. According to Gallagher,
decades of research contradict this understanding. Our brains instead construct our worldview based
on what we pay attention to. If you focus on a cancer diagnosis, you and your life become unhappy
and dark, but if you focus instead on an evening martini, you and your life become more
pleasant—even though the circumstances in both scenarios are the same. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 56, loc. 850-855 We tend to place a lot of emphasis
on our circumstances, assuming that what happens to us (or fails to happen) determines how we feel.
From this perspective, the small-scale details of how you spend your day aren’t that important,
because what matters are the large-scale outcomes, such as whether or not you get a promotion or
move to that nicer apartment. According to Gallagher, decades of research contradict this
understanding. Our brains instead construct our worldview based on what we pay attention to. If you
focus on a cancer diagnosis, you and your life become unhappy and dark, but if you focus instead on
an evening martini, you and your life become more pleasant—even though the circumstances in both
scenarios are the same. As Gallagher summarizes: “Who you are, what you think, feel, and do, what
you love—is the sum of what you focus on.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 56, loc. 850-856 This theory tells us that your world is the outcome of what
you pay attention to, so consider for a moment the type of mental world constructed when you
dedicate significant time to deep endeavors. There’s a gravity and sense of importance inherent in
deep work—whether Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 57,
loc. 872-874 This theory tells us that your world is the outcome of what you pay attention to, so
consider for a moment the type of mental world constructed when you dedicate significant time to
deep endeavors. There’s a gravity and sense of importance inherent in deep work—whether you’re Ric
Furrer smithing a sword or a computer programmer optimizing an algorithm. Gallagher’s theory,
therefore, predicts that if you spend enough time in this state, your mind will understand your
world as rich in meaning and importance. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 57, loc. 872-876 hidden but equally important benefit to cultivating rapt
attention in your workday: Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 58, loc. 876-877 hidden but equally important benefit to cultivating rapt attention in your
workday: Such concentration hijacks your attention apparatus, preventing you from noticing the many
smaller and less pleasant things that unavoidably and persistently populate our lives. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 58, loc. 876-878 psychologist Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi, whom we’ll learn more about in the next section, explicitly identifies this
advantage when he emphasizes the advantage of cultivating “concentration so intense that there is no
attention left over to think about anything irrelevant, or to worry about problems.”) Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 58, loc. 878-880 psychologist Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi, whom we’ll learn more about in the next section, explicitly identifies this
advantage when he emphasizes the advantage of cultivating “concentration so intense that there is no
attention left over to think about anything irrelevant, or to worry about problems.”) This danger is
especially pronounced in knowledge work, which due to its dependence on ubiquitous connectivity
generates a devastatingly appealing buffet of distraction—most of which will, if given enough
attention, leach meaning and importance from the world constructed by your mind. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 58, loc. 878-882 “Five years of reporting
on attention have confirmed some home truths,” Gallagher reports. “[Among them is the notion that]
‘the idle mind is the devil’s workshop’… when you lose focus, your mind tends to fix on what could
be wrong with your life instead of what’s right.” A workday driven by the shallow, from a
neurological perspective, is likely to be a draining and upsetting day, even if most of the shallow
things that capture your attention seem harmless or fun. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 59, loc. 904-908 In work (and especially knowledge work), to
increase the time you spend in a state of depth is to leverage the complex machinery of the human
brain in a way that for several different neurological reasons maximizes the meaning and
satisfaction you’ll associate with your working life. “After running my tough experiment [with
cancer]… I have a plan for living the rest of my life,” Gallagher concludes in her book. “I’ll
choose my targets with care… then give them my rapt attention. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 60, loc. 908-911 In work (and especially knowledge work),
to increase the time you spend in a state of depth is to leverage the complex machinery of the human
brain in a way that for several different neurological reasons maximizes the meaning and
satisfaction you’ll associate with your working life. “After running my tough experiment [with
cancer]… I have a plan for living the rest of my life,” Gallagher concludes in her book. “I’ll
choose my targets with care… then give them my rapt attention. In short, I’ll live the focused life,
because it’s the best kind there is.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 60, loc. 908-912 A Psychological Argument for Depth Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 60, loc. 913-913 Csikszentmihalyi’s work with
ESM helped validate a theory he had been developing over the preceding decade: “The best moments
usually occur when a person’s body or mind is stretched to its limits in a voluntary effort to
accomplish something difficult and worthwhile.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 61, loc. 927-929 Csikszentmihalyi’s work with ESM helped validate a theory
he had been developing over the preceding decade: “The best moments usually occur when a person’s
body or mind is stretched to its limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something difficult and
worthwhile.” Csikszentmihalyi calls this mental state flow (a term he popularized with a 1990 book
of the same title). At the time, this finding pushed back against conventional wisdom. Most people
assumed (and still do) that relaxation makes them happy. We want to work less and spend more time in
the hammock. But the results from Csikszentmihalyi’s ESM studies reveal that most people have this
wrong: Ironically, jobs are actually easier to enjoy than free time, because like flow activities
they have built-in goals, feedback rules, and challenges, all of which encourage one to become
involved in one’s work, to concentrate and lose oneself in it. Free time, on the other hand, is
unstructured, and requires much greater effort to be shaped into something that can be enjoyed. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 61, loc. 927-934 When
measured empirically, people were happier at work and less happy relaxing than they suspected. And
as the ESM studies confirmed, the more such flow experiences that occur in a given week, the higher
the subject’s life satisfaction. Human beings, it seems, are at their best when immersed deeply in
something challenging. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
61, loc. 935-937 Gallagher’s writing emphasizes that the content of what we focus on matters. If we
give rapt attention to important things, and therefore also ignore shallow negative things, we’ll
experience our working life as more important and positive. Csikszentmihalyi’s theory of flow, by
contrast, is mostly agnostic to the content of our attention. Though he would likely agree with the
research cited by Gallagher, his theory notes that the feeling of going deep is in itself very
rewarding. Our minds like this challenge, regardless of the subject. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 62, loc. 939-943 Deep work is an activity well suited
to generate a flow state (the phrases used by Csikszentmihalyi to describe what generates flow
include notions of stretching your mind to its limits, concentrating, and losing yourself in an
activity—all of which also describe deep work). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 62, loc. 944-946 Deep work is an activity well suited to generate a flow
state (the phrases used by Csikszentmihalyi to describe what generates flow include notions of
stretching your mind to its limits, concentrating, and losing yourself in an activity—all of which
also describe deep work). And as we just learned, flow generates happiness. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 62, loc. 944-946 Decades of research stemming
from Csikszentmihalyi’s original ESM experiments validate that the act of going deep orders the
consciousness in a way that makes life worthwhile. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 62, loc. 947-948 Decades of research stemming from Csikszentmihalyi’s
original ESM experiments validate that the act of going deep orders the consciousness in a way that
makes life worthwhile. Csikszentmihalyi even goes so far as to argue that modern companies should
embrace this reality, suggesting that “jobs should be redesigned so that they resemble as closely as
possible flow activities.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 62, loc. 947-950 Decades of research stemming from Csikszentmihalyi’s original ESM experiments
validate that the act of going deep orders the consciousness in a way that makes life worthwhile.
Csikszentmihalyi even goes so far as to argue that modern companies should embrace this reality,
suggesting that “jobs should be redesigned so that they resemble as closely as possible flow
activities.” Noting, however, that such a redesign would be difficult and disruptive Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 62, loc. 947-950 Decades of research
stemming from Csikszentmihalyi’s original ESM experiments validate that the act of going deep orders
the consciousness in a way that makes life worthwhile. Csikszentmihalyi even goes so far as to argue
that modern companies should embrace this reality, suggesting that “jobs should be redesigned so
that they resemble as closely as possible flow activities.” Noting, however, that such a redesign
would be difficult and disruptive (see, for example, my arguments from the previous chapter),
Csikszentmihalyi then explains that it’s even more important that the individual learn how to seek
out opportunities for flow. This, ultimately, is the lesson to come away with from our brief foray
into the world of experimental psychology: To build your working life around the experience of flow
produced by deep work is a proven path to deep satisfaction. A Philosophical Argument for Depth Our
final argument for the connection between depth and meaning requires us to step back from the more
concrete worlds of neuroscience and psychology and instead adopt a philosophical perspective. I’ll
turn for help in this discussion to a pair of scholars who know this topic well: Hubert Dreyfus, who
taught philosophy at Berkeley for more than four decades, and Sean Dorrance Kelly, who at the time
of this writing is the chair of Harvard’s philosophy department. In 2011, Dreyfus and Kelly
published a book, All Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
62, loc. 947-957 Csikszentmihalyi then explains that it’s even more important that the individual
learn how to seek out opportunities for flow. This, ultimately, is the lesson to come away with from
our brief foray into the world of experimental psychology: To build your working life around the
experience of flow produced by deep work is a proven path to deep satisfaction. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 62, loc. 951-953 A Philosophical Argument
for Depth Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 63, loc.
953-954 “The world used to be, in its various forms, a world of sacred, shining things,” Dreyfus and
Kelly explain early in the book. “The shining things now seem far away.” Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 63, loc. 959-960 From Descartes’s skepticism
came the radical belief that the individual seeking certainty trumped a God or king bestowing truth.
The resulting Enlightenment, of course, led to the concept of human rights and freed many from
oppression. But as Dreyfus and Kelly emphasize, for all its good in the political arena, in the
domain of the metaphysical this thinking stripped the world of the order and sacredness essential to
creating meaning. In a post-Enlightenment world we have tasked ourselves to identify what’s
meaningful and what’s not, an exercise that can seem arbitrary and induce a creeping nihilism. “The
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 63, loc. 961-965 From
Descartes’s skepticism came the radical belief that the individual seeking certainty trumped a God
or king bestowing truth. The resulting Enlightenment, of course, led to the concept of human rights
and freed many from oppression. But as Dreyfus and Kelly emphasize, for all its good in the
political arena, in the domain of the metaphysical this thinking stripped the world of the order and
sacredness essential to creating meaning. In a post-Enlightenment world we have tasked ourselves to
identify what’s meaningful and what’s not, an exercise that can seem arbitrary and induce a creeping
nihilism. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 63, loc.
961-965 “The Enlightenment’s metaphysical embrace of the autonomous individual leads not just to a
boring life,” Dreyfus and Kelly worry; “it leads almost inevitably to a nearly unlivable one.” Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 63, loc. 965-967 Dreyfus
and Kelly’s response to modern nihilism builds on the very subject that opened this chapter: the
craftsman. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 64, loc.
969-970 Craftsmanship, Dreyfus and Kelly argue in their book’s conclusion, provides a key to
reopening a sense of sacredness in a responsible manner. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 64, loc. 970-971 In this appreciation for the “subtle virtues” of
his medium, they note, the craftsman has stumbled onto something crucial in a post-Enlightenment
world: a source of meaning sited outside the individual. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 64, loc. 974-975 In this appreciation for the “subtle virtues” of
his medium, they note, the craftsman has stumbled onto something crucial in a post-Enlightenment
world: a source of meaning sited outside the individual. The wheelwright doesn’t decide arbitrarily
which virtues of the wood he works are valuable and which are not; this value is inherent in the
wood and the task it’s meant to perform. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 64, loc. 974-977 such sacredness is common to craftsmanship. The task of a
craftsman, they conclude, “is not to generate meaning, but rather to cultivate in himself the skill
of discerning the meanings that are already there.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 64, loc. 977-979 such sacredness is common to craftsmanship. The
task of a craftsman, they conclude, “is not to generate meaning, but rather to cultivate in himself
the skill of discerning the meanings that are already there.” This frees the craftsman of the
nihilism of autonomous individualism, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 64, loc. 977-979 such sacredness is common to craftsmanship. The task of a
craftsman, they conclude, “is not to generate meaning, but rather to cultivate in himself the skill
of discerning the meanings that are already there.” This frees the craftsman of the nihilism of
autonomous individualism, providing an ordered world of meaning. At the same time, this meaning
seems safer than the sources cited in previous eras. The wheelwright, the authors imply, cannot
easily use the inherent quality of a piece of pine to justify a despotic monarchy. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 64, loc. 977-981 The look of satisfaction
on Furrer’s face as he works to extract artistry from crude metals, these philosophers would argue,
is a look expressing appreciation for something elusive and valuable in modernity: a glimpse of the
sacred. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 65, loc.
984-985 we can connect this sacredness inherent in traditional craftsmanship to the world of
knowledge work. To do so, there are two key observations we must first make. The first might be
obvious but requires emphasis: There’s nothing intrinsic about the manual trades when it comes to
generating this particular source of meaning. Any pursuit—be it physical or cognitive—that supports
high levels of skill can also generate a sense of sacredness. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 65, loc. 986-989 The Pragmatic Programmer, a
well-regarded book in the computer programming field, makes this connection between code and
old-style craftsmanship more directly by quoting the medieval quarry worker’s creed in its preface:
“We who cut mere stones must always be envisioning cathedrals.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 65, loc. 994-996 The Pragmatic Programmer, a
well-regarded book in the computer programming field, makes this connection between code and
old-style craftsmanship more directly by quoting the medieval quarry worker’s creed in its preface:
“We who cut mere stones must always be envisioning cathedrals.” The book then elaborates that
computer programmers must see their work in the same way: Within the overall structure of a project
there is always room for individuality and craftsmanship… One hundred years from now, our
engineering may seem as archaic as the techniques used by medieval cathedral builders seem to
today’s civil engineers, while our craftsmanship will still be honored. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 65, loc. 994-999 Your work is craft, and if you
hone your ability and apply it with respect and care, then like the skilled wheelwright you can
generate meaning in the daily efforts of your professional life. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 66, loc. 1002-1003 In our current culture, we place a lot
of emphasis on job description. Our obsession with the advice to “follow your passion” (the subject
of my last book), for example, is motivated by the (flawed) idea that what matters most for your
career satisfaction is the specifics of the job you choose. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 66, loc. 1005-1007 The meaning uncovered by such efforts
is due to the skill and appreciation inherent in craftsmanship—not the outcomes of their work. Put
another way, a wooden wheel is not noble, but its shaping can be. The same applies to knowledge
work. You don’t need a rarified job; you need instead a rarified approach to your work. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 66, loc. 1010-1012 second key
observation about this line of argument is that cultivating craftsmanship is necessarily a deep task
and therefore requires a commitment to deep work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 67, loc. 1013-1014 second key observation about this line of argument is
that cultivating craftsmanship is necessarily a deep task and therefore requires a commitment to
deep work. (Recall that I argued in Chapter 1 that deep work is necessary to hone skills and to then
apply them at an elite level—the core activities in craft.) Deep work, therefore, is key to
extracting meaning from your profession in the manner described by Dreyfus and Kelly. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 67, loc. 1013-1016 second key
observation about this line of argument is that cultivating craftsmanship is necessarily a deep task
and therefore requires a commitment to deep work. (Recall that I argued in Chapter 1 that deep work
is necessary to hone skills and to then apply them at an elite level—the core activities in craft.)
Deep work, therefore, is key to extracting meaning from your profession in the manner described by
Dreyfus and Kelly. It follows that to embrace deep work in your own career, and to direct it toward
cultivating your skill, is an effort that can transform a knowledge work job from a distracted,
draining obligation into something satisfying—a portal to a world full of shining, wondrous things.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 67, loc. 1013-1017 as
with many such efforts, well-reasoned, pragmatic arguments can motivate you only to a certain point.
Eventually, the goal you pursue needs to resonate at a more human level. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 67, loc. 1023-1024 Whether you approach the
activity of going deep from the perspective of neuroscience, psychology, or lofty philosophy, these
paths all seem to lead back to a connection between depth and meaning. It’s as if our species has
evolved into one that flourishes in depth and wallows in shallowness, becoming what we might call
Homo sapiens deepensis. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
67, loc. 1025-1027 “I’ll live the focused life, because it’s the best kind there is.” Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 68, loc. 1028-1029 “I’ll live the
focused life, because it’s the best kind there is.” This is perhaps the best way to sum up the
argument of this chapter and of Part 1 more broadly: A deep life is a good life, any way you look at
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 68, loc. 1028-1030
“I’ll live the focused life, because it’s the best kind there is.” This is perhaps the best way to
sum up the argument of this chapter and of Part 1 more broadly: A deep life is a good life, any way
you look at it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 68,
loc. 1028-1030 Why do we need such involved interventions? Put another way, once you accept that
deep work is valuable, isn’t it enough to just start doing more of it? Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 70, loc. 1071-1072 Unfortunately, when it comes to
replacing distraction with focus, matters are not so simple. To understand why this is true let’s
take a closer look at one of the main obstacles to going deep: the urge to turn your attention
toward something more superficial. Most people recognize that this urge can complicate efforts to
concentrate on hard things, but most underestimate its regularity and strength. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 70, loc. 1074-1076 People fight desires
all day long. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 71, loc.
1080-1081 “Desire turned out to be the norm, not the exception.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 71, loc. 1081-1082 “Desire turned out to be the norm, not
the exception.” The five most common desires these subjects fought include, not surprisingly,
eating, sleeping, and sex. But the top five list also included desires for “taking a break from
[hard] work… checking e-mail and social networking sites, surfing the web, listening to music, or
watching television.” The lure of the Internet and television proved especially strong: The subjects
succeeded in resisting these particularly addictive distractions only around half the time. These
results are bad news for this rule’s goal of helping you cultivate a deep work habit. They tell us
that you can expect to be bombarded with the desire to do anything but work deeply throughout the
day, and if you’re like the German subjects from the Hofmann and Baumeister study, these competing
desires will often win out. You might respond at this point that you will succeed where these
subjects failed because you understand the importance of depth and will therefore be more rigorous
in your will to remain concentrated. This is a noble sentiment, but the decades of research that
preceded this study underscore its futility. A now voluminous line of inquiry, initiated in a series
of pioneering papers also written by Roy Baumeister, has established the following important (and at
the time, unexpected) truth about willpower: You have a finite amount of willpower that becomes
depleted as you use it. Your will, in other words, is not a manifestation of your character that you
can deploy without limit; it’s instead like a muscle that tires. This is why the subjects in the
Hofmann and Baumeister study had such a hard time fighting desires—over time these distractions
drained their finite pool of willpower until they could no longer resist. The same will happen to
you, regardless of your intentions—unless, that is, you’re smart about your habits. This brings me
to the motivating idea behind the strategies that follow: The key to developing a deep work habit is
to move beyond good intentions and add routines and rituals to your working life designed to
minimize the amount of your limited willpower necessary to transition into and maintain a state of
unbroken concentration. If you suddenly decide, for example, in the middle of a distracted afternoon
spent Web browsing, to switch your attention to a cognitively demanding task, you’ll draw heavily
from your finite Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 71,
loc. 1081-1099 The five most common desires these subjects fought include, not surprisingly, eating,
sleeping, and sex. But the top five list also included desires for “taking a break from [hard] work…
checking e-mail and social networking sites, surfing the web, listening to music, or watching
television.” The lure of the Internet and television proved especially strong: The subjects
succeeded in resisting these particularly Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 71, loc. 1082-1085 The five most common desires these subjects fought include,
not surprisingly, eating, sleeping, and sex. But the top five list also included desires for “taking
a break from [hard] work… checking e-mail and social networking sites, surfing the web, listening to
music, or watching television.” The lure of the Internet and television proved especially strong:
The subjects succeeded in resisting these particularly addictive distractions only around half the
time. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 71, loc.
1082-1085 The five most common desires these subjects fought include, not surprisingly, eating,
sleeping, and sex. But the top five list also included desires for “taking a break from [hard] work…
checking e-mail and social networking sites, surfing the web, listening to music, or watching
television.” The lure of the Internet and television proved especially strong: The subjects
succeeded in resisting these particularly addictive distractions only around half the time. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 71, loc. 1082-1085 These
results are bad news for this rule’s goal of helping you cultivate a deep work habit. They tell us
that you can expect to be bombarded with the desire to do anything but work deeply throughout the
day, and if you’re like the German subjects from the Hofmann and Baumeister study, these competing
desires will often win out. You might respond at this point that you will succeed where these
subjects failed because you understand the importance of depth and will therefore be more rigorous
in your will to remain concentrated. This is a noble sentiment, but the decades of research that
preceded this study underscore its futility. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 71, loc. 1086-1090 These results are bad news for this rule’s goal of helping
you cultivate a deep work habit. They tell us that you can expect to be bombarded with the desire to
do anything but work deeply throughout the day, and if you’re like the German subjects from the
Hofmann and Baumeister study, these competing desires will often win out. You might respond at this
point that you will succeed where these subjects failed because you understand the importance of
depth and will therefore be more rigorous in your will to remain concentrated. This is a noble
sentiment, but the decades of research that preceded this study underscore its futility. A now
voluminous line of inquiry, initiated in a series of pioneering papers also written by Roy
Baumeister, has established the following important (and at the time, unexpected) truth about
willpower: You have a finite amount of willpower that becomes depleted as you use it. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 71, loc. 1086-1092 Your will, in
other words, is not a manifestation of your character that you can deploy without limit; it’s
instead like a muscle that tires. This is why the subjects in the Hofmann and Baumeister study had
such a hard time fighting desires—over time these distractions drained their finite pool of
willpower until they could no longer resist. The same will happen to you, regardless of your
intentions—unless, that is, you’re smart about your habits. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 72, loc. 1092-1095 The key to developing a deep work
habit is to move beyond good intentions and add routines and rituals to your working life designed
to minimize the amount of your limited willpower necessary to transition into and maintain a state
of unbroken concentration. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 72, loc. 1096-1098 if you deployed smart routines and rituals—perhaps a set time and quiet
location used for your deep tasks each afternoon—you’d require much less willpower to start and keep
going. In the long run, you’d therefore succeed with these deep efforts far more often. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 72, loc. 1100-1102 Knuth deploys a
form of monasticism that prioritizes deep work by trying to eliminate or minimize all other types of
work. Chappell, by contrast, deploys a rhythmic strategy in which he works for the same hours (five
to seven thirty a.m.) every weekday morning, without exception, before beginning a workday
punctuated by standard distractions. Both approaches work, but not universally. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 73, loc. 1115-1117 Knuth deploys a form
of monasticism that prioritizes deep work by trying to eliminate or minimize all other types of
work. Chappell, by contrast, deploys a rhythmic strategy in which he works for the same hours (five
to seven thirty a.m.) every weekday morning, without exception, before beginning a workday
punctuated by standard distractions. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 73, loc. 1115-1117 Knuth deploys a form of monasticism that prioritizes deep
work by trying to eliminate or minimize all other types of work. Chappell, by contrast, deploys a
rhythmic strategy in which he works for the same hours (five to seven thirty a.m.) every weekday
morning, without exception, before beginning a workday punctuated by standard distractions. Both
approaches work, but not universally. Knuth’s approach might make sense for someone whose primary
professional obligation is to think big thoughts, but if Chappell adopted a similar rejection of all
things shallow, he’d likely lose his job. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 73, loc. 1115-1119 The Monastic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 74, loc. 1125-1125 Knuth
deploys what I call the monastic philosophy of deep work scheduling. This philosophy attempts to
maximize deep efforts by eliminating or radically minimizing shallow obligations. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 75, loc. 1136-1138 Knuth deploys what I
call the monastic philosophy of deep work scheduling. This philosophy attempts to maximize deep
efforts by eliminating or radically minimizing shallow obligations. Practitioners of the monastic
philosophy tend to have a well-defined and highly valued professional goal that they’re pursuing,
and the bulk of their professional success comes from doing this one thing exceptionally well. It’s
this clarity that helps them eliminate the thicket of shallow concerns that tend to trip up those
whose value Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 75, loc.
1136-1140 Knuth deploys what I call the monastic philosophy of deep work scheduling. This philosophy
attempts to maximize deep efforts by eliminating or radically minimizing shallow obligations.
Practitioners of the monastic philosophy tend to have a well-defined and highly valued professional
goal that they’re pursuing, and the bulk of their professional success comes from doing this one
thing exceptionally well. It’s this clarity that helps them eliminate the thicket of shallow
concerns that tend to trip up those whose value proposition in the working world is more varied. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 75, loc. 1136-1140 The
productivity equation is a non-linear one, in other words. This accounts for why I am a bad
correspondent and why I very rarely accept speaking engagements. If I organize my life in such a way
that I get lots of long, consecutive, uninterrupted time-chunks, I can write novels. But as those
chunks get separated and fragmented, my productivity as a novelist drops spectacularly. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 76, loc. 1153-1155 the monastic
philosophy makes many knowledge workers defensive. The clarity with which its adherents identify
their value to the world, I suspect, touches a raw nerve for those whose contribution to the
information economy is more complex. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 76, loc. 1161-1162 The Bimodal Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 77, loc. 1168-1169 Jung’s approach
is what I call the bimodal philosophy of deep work. This philosophy asks that you divide your time,
dedicating some clearly defined stretches to deep pursuits and leaving the rest open to everything
else. During the deep time, the bimodal worker will act monastically—seeking intense and
uninterrupted concentration. During the shallow time, such focus is not prioritized. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 78, loc. 1183-1185 Jung’s approach
is what I call the bimodal philosophy of deep work. This philosophy asks that you divide your time,
dedicating some clearly defined stretches to deep pursuits and leaving the rest open to everything
else. During the deep time, the bimodal worker will act monastically—seeking intense and
uninterrupted concentration. During the shallow time, such focus is not prioritized. This division
of time between deep and open can happen on multiple scales. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 78, loc. 1183-1186 The bimodal philosophy believes that
deep work can produce extreme productivity, but only if the subject dedicates enough time to such
endeavors to reach maximum cognitive intensity—the state in which real breakthroughs occur. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 78, loc. 1188-1190 The
bimodal philosophy believes that deep work can produce extreme productivity, but only if the subject
dedicates enough time to such endeavors to reach maximum cognitive intensity—the state in which real
breakthroughs occur. This is why the minimum unit of time for deep work in this philosophy tends to
be at least one full day. To put aside a few hours in the morning, for example, is too short to
count as a deep work stretch for an adherent of this approach. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 78, loc. 1188-1191 His 2013 bestseller, Give and Take,
promotes the practice of giving of your time and attention, without expectation of something in
return, as a key strategy in professional advancement. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 79, loc. 1200-1202 Those who deploy the bimodal philosophy of
deep work admire the productivity of the monastics but also respect the value they receive from the
shallow behaviors in their working lives. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 79, loc. 1202-1203 people will usually respect your right to become
inaccessible if these periods are well defined and well advertised, and outside these stretches,
you’re once again easy to find. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 79, loc. 1208-1210 The Rhythmic Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 79, loc. 1210-1210 “the way to be a
better comic was to create better jokes,” and then explaining that the way to create better jokes
was to write every day. Seinfeld continued by describing a specific technique he used to help
maintain this discipline. He keeps a calendar on his wall. Every day that he writes jokes he crosses
out the date on the calendar with a big red X. “After a few days you’ll have a chain,” Seinfeld
said. “Just keep at it and the chain will grow longer every day. You’ll like seeing that chain,
especially when you get a few weeks under your Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 80, loc. 1215-1219 “the way to be a better comic was to create better
jokes,” and then explaining that the way to create better jokes was to write every day. Seinfeld
continued by describing a specific technique he used to help maintain this discipline. He keeps a
calendar on his wall. Every day that he writes jokes he crosses out the date on the calendar with a
big red X. “After a few days you’ll have a chain,” Seinfeld said. “Just keep at it and the chain
will grow longer every day. You’ll like seeing that chain, especially when you get a few weeks under
your belt. Your only job next is to not break the chain.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 80, loc. 1215-1219 This chain method (as some now call it) soon
became a hit among writers and fitness enthusiasts—communities that thrive on the ability to do hard
things consistently. For our purposes, it provides a specific example of a general approach to
integrating depth into your life: the rhythmic philosophy. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 80, loc. 1219-1221 it provides a specific example of a general
approach to integrating depth into your life: the rhythmic philosophy. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 80, loc. 1221-1221 it provides a specific example of
a general approach to integrating depth into your life: the rhythmic philosophy. This philosophy
argues that the easiest way to consistently start deep work sessions is to transform them into a
simple regular habit. The goal, in other words, is to generate a rhythm for this work that removes
the need for you to invest energy in deciding if and when you’re going to go deep. The chain method
is a good example of the rhythmic philosophy of deep work scheduling because it combines a simple
scheduling heuristic (do the work every day), with an easy way to remind yourself to do the work:
the big red Xs on the calendar. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 80, loc. 1221-1225 Another common way to implement the rhythmic philosophy is to replace
the visual aid of the chain method with a set starting time that you use every day for deep work. In
much the same way that maintaining visual indicators of your work progress can reduce the barrier to
entry for going deep, eliminating even the simplest scheduling decisions, such as when during the
day to do the work, also reduces this barrier. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 80, loc. 1225-1228 The rhythmic philosophy provides an interesting contrast
to the bimodal philosophy. It perhaps fails to achieve the most intense levels of deep thinking
sought in the daylong concentration sessions favored by the bimodalist. The trade-off, however, is
that this approach works better with the reality of human nature. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 82, loc. 1245-1247 The rhythmic philosophy provides an
interesting contrast to the bimodal philosophy. It perhaps fails to achieve the most intense levels
of deep thinking sought in the daylong concentration sessions favored by the bimodalist. The
trade-off, however, is that this approach works better with the reality of human nature. By
supporting deep work with rock-solid routines that make sure a little bit gets done on a regular
basis, the rhythmic scheduler will often log a larger total number of deep hours per year. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 82, loc. 1245-1248 The
rhythmic philosophy provides an interesting contrast to the bimodal philosophy. It perhaps fails to
achieve the most intense levels of deep thinking sought in the daylong concentration sessions
favored by the bimodalist. The trade-off, however, is that this approach works better with the
reality of human nature. By supporting deep work with rock-solid routines that make sure a little
bit gets done on a regular basis, the rhythmic scheduler will often log a larger total number of
deep hours per year. The decision between rhythmic and bimodal can come down to your self-control in
such scheduling matters. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 82, loc. 1245-1249 The decision between rhythmic and bimodal can come down to your self-control
in such scheduling matters. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 82, loc. 1249-1249 For many, however, it’s not just self-control issues that bias them toward
the rhythmic philosophy, but also the reality that some jobs don’t allow you to disappear for days
at a time when the need to go deep arises. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 82, loc. 1252-1254 This is likely the biggest reason why the rhythmic
philosophy is one of the most common among deep workers in standard office jobs. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 82, loc. 1255-1255 The Journalistic
Philosophy of Deep Work Scheduling Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 82, loc. 1256-1256 Isaacson was methodic: Any time he could find some free time, he would
switch into a deep work mode and hammer away at his book. This is how, it turns out, one can write a
nine-hundred-page book on the side while spending the bulk of one’s day becoming one of the
country’s best magazine writers. I call this approach, in which you fit deep work wherever you can
into your schedule, the journalist philosophy. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 84, loc. 1273-1276 This approach is not for the deep work novice. As I
established in the opening to this rule, the ability to rapidly switch your mind from shallow to
deep mode doesn’t come naturally. Without practice, such switches can seriously deplete your finite
willpower reserves. This habit also requires a sense of confidence in your abilities—a conviction
that what you’re doing is important and will succeed. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 84, loc. 1278-1281 This approach is not for the deep work novice.
As I established in the opening to this rule, the ability to rapidly switch your mind from shallow
to deep mode doesn’t come naturally. Without practice, such switches can seriously deplete your
finite willpower reserves. This habit also requires a sense of confidence in your abilities—a
conviction that what you’re doing is important and will succeed. This type of conviction is
typically built on a foundation of existing professional accomplishment. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 84, loc. 1278-1281 I should admit that I’m not
pure in my application of the journalist philosophy. I don’t, for example, make all my deep work
decisions on a moment-to-moment basis. I instead tend to map out when I’ll work deeply during each
week at the beginning of the week, and then refine these decisions, as needed, at the beginning of
each day Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 85, loc.
1292-1295 I should admit that I’m not pure in my application of the journalist philosophy. I don’t,
for example, make all my deep work decisions on a moment-to-moment basis. I instead tend to map out
when I’ll work deeply during each week at the beginning of the week, and then refine these
decisions, as needed, at the beginning of each day (see Rule #4 for more details on my scheduling
routines). By reducing the need to make decisions about deep work moment by moment, I can preserve
more mental energy for the deep thinking itself. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 85, loc. 1292-1296 Ritualize Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 85, loc. 1299-1299 An often-overlooked observation about those
who use their minds to create valuable things is that they’re rarely haphazard in their work habits.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 85, loc. 1300-1301
There is a popular notion that artists work from inspiration—that there is some strike or bolt or
bubbling up of creative mojo from who knows where… but I hope [my work] makes clear that waiting for
inspiration to strike is a terrible, terrible plan. In fact, perhaps the single best piece of advice
I can offer to anyone trying to do creative work is to ignore inspiration. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 86, loc. 1311-1313 There is a popular notion
that artists work from inspiration—that there is some strike or bolt or bubbling up of creative mojo
from who knows where… but I hope [my work] makes clear that waiting for inspiration to strike is a
terrible, terrible plan. In fact, perhaps the single best piece of advice I can offer to anyone
trying to do creative work is to ignore inspiration. In a New York Times column on the topic, David
Brooks summarizes this reality more bluntly: “[Great creative minds] think like artists but work
like accountants.” This strategy suggests the following: To make the most out of your deep work
sessions, build rituals of the same level of strictness and idiosyncrasy as the important thinkers
mentioned previously. There’s a good reason for this mimicry. Great minds like Caro and Darwin
didn’t deploy rituals to be weird; they did so because success in their work depended on their
ability to go deep, again and again—there’s no way to win a Pulitzer Prize or conceive a grand
theory without pushing your brain to its limit. Their rituals minimized the friction in this
transition to depth, allowing them to go deep more easily and stay in the state longer. If Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 86, loc. 1311-1320 There is
a popular notion that artists work from inspiration—that there is some strike or bolt or bubbling up
of creative mojo from who knows where… but I hope [my work] makes clear that waiting for inspiration
to strike is a terrible, terrible plan. In fact, perhaps the single best piece of advice I can offer
to anyone trying to do creative work is to ignore inspiration. In a New York Times column on the
topic, David Brooks summarizes this reality more bluntly: “[Great creative minds] think like artists
but work like accountants.” This strategy suggests the following: To make the most out of your deep
work sessions, build rituals of the same level of strictness and idiosyncrasy as the important
thinkers mentioned previously. There’s a good reason for this mimicry. Great minds like Caro and
Darwin didn’t deploy rituals to be weird; they did so because success in their work depended on
their ability to go deep, again and again—there’s no way to win a Pulitzer Prize or conceive a grand
theory without pushing your brain to its limit. Their rituals minimized the friction in this
transition to depth, allowing them to go deep more easily and stay in the state longer. If they had
instead waited for inspiration to strike before settling in to serious work, their accomplishments
would likely have been greatly reduced. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 86, loc. 1311-1321 “[Great creative minds] think like artists but work like
accountants.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 86, loc.
1314-1315 This strategy suggests the following: To make the most out of your deep work sessions,
build rituals of the same level of strictness and idiosyncrasy as the important thinkers mentioned
previously. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 86, loc.
1316-1317 To make the most out of your deep work sessions, build rituals of the same level of
strictness and idiosyncrasy as the important thinkers mentioned previously. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 86, loc. 1316-1317 Great minds like Caro and
Darwin didn’t deploy rituals to be weird; they did so because success in their work depended on
their ability to go deep, again and again—there’s Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 86, loc. 1318-1319 Their rituals minimized the friction in this
transition to depth, allowing them to go deep more easily and stay in the state longer. If they had
instead waited for inspiration to strike before settling in to serious work, their accomplishments
would likely have been greatly reduced. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 87, loc. 1319-1321 Their rituals minimized the friction in this transition to
depth, allowing them to go deep more easily and stay in the state longer. If they had instead waited
for inspiration to strike before settling in to serious work, their accomplishments would likely
have been greatly reduced. There’s no one correct deep work ritual—the right fit depends on both the
person and the type of project pursued. But there are some general questions that any effective
ritual must address: Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
87, loc. 1319-1323 Where you’ll work and for how long. Your ritual needs to specify a location for
your deep work efforts. This location can be as simple as your normal office with the door shut and
desk cleaned off Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 87,
loc. 1323-1325 If it’s possible to identify a location used only for depth—for instance, a
conference room or quiet library—the positive effect can be even greater. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 87, loc. 1326-1327 Regardless of where you
work, be sure to also give yourself a specific time frame to keep the session a discrete challenge
and not an open-ended slog. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 87, loc. 1327-1328 How you’ll work once you start to work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 87, loc. 1329-1329 How you’ll work once you start to
work. Your ritual needs rules and processes to keep your efforts structured. For example, you might
institute a ban on any Internet use, or maintain a metric such as words produced per twenty-minute
interval to keep your concentration honed. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 87, loc. 1329-1331 How you’ll work once you start to work. Your ritual needs
rules and processes to keep your efforts structured. For example, you might institute a ban on any
Internet use, or maintain a metric such as words produced per twenty-minute interval to keep your
concentration honed. Without this structure, you’ll have to mentally litigate again and again what
you should and should not be doing during these sessions and keep trying to assess whether you’re
working sufficiently hard. These are unnecessary drains on your willpower reserves. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 87, loc. 1329-1332 How you’ll
support your work. Your ritual needs to ensure your brain gets the support it needs to keep
operating at a high level of depth. For example, the ritual might specify that you start with a cup
of good coffee, or make sure you have access to enough food of the right type to maintain energy, or
integrate light exercise such as walking to help keep the mind clear. (As Nietzsche said: “It is
only ideas gained from walking that have any worth.”) Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 87, loc. 1333-1336 How you’ll support your work. Your ritual
needs to ensure your brain gets the support it needs to keep operating at a high level of depth. For
example, the ritual might specify that you start with a cup of good coffee, or make sure you have
access to enough food of the right type to maintain energy, or integrate light exercise such as
walking to help keep the mind clear. (As Nietzsche said: “It is only ideas gained from walking that
have any worth.”) This support might also include environmental factors, such as organizing the raw
materials of your work to minimize energy-dissipating friction Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 87, loc. 1333-1337 To maximize your success, you need to
support your efforts to go deep. At the same time, this support needs to be systematized so that you
don’t waste mental energy figuring out what you need in the moment. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 88, loc. 1337-1339 finding a ritual that sticks might
require experimentation, so be willing to work at it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 88, loc. 1340-1340 Surrounding such efforts with a complicated
(and perhaps, to the outside world, quite strange) ritual accepts this reality—providing your mind
with the structure and commitment it needs to slip into the state of focus where you can begin to
create things that matter. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 88, loc. 1342-1343 Make Grand Gestures Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 88, loc. 1344-1344 Rowling’s decision to check into a luxurious hotel suite
near Edinburgh Castle is an example of a curious but effective strategy in the world of deep work:
the grand gesture. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 89,
loc. 1355-1356 Rowling’s decision to check into a luxurious hotel suite near Edinburgh Castle is an
example of a curious but effective strategy in the world of deep work: the grand gesture. The
concept is simple: By leveraging a radical change to your normal environment, coupled perhaps with a
significant investment of effort or money, all dedicated toward supporting a deep work task, you
increase the perceived importance of the task. This boost in importance reduces Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 89, loc. 1355-1358 Rowling’s decision to
check into a luxurious hotel suite near Edinburgh Castle is an example of a curious but effective
strategy in the world of deep work: the grand gesture. The concept is simple: By leveraging a
radical change to your normal environment, coupled perhaps with a significant investment of effort
or money, all dedicated toward supporting a deep work task, you increase the perceived importance of
the task. This boost in importance reduces your mind’s instinct to procrastinate and delivers an
injection of motivation and energy. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 89, loc. 1355-1359 Rowling’s decision to check into a luxurious hotel suite
near Edinburgh Castle is an example of a curious but effective strategy in the world of deep work:
the grand gesture. The concept is simple: By leveraging a radical change to your normal environment,
coupled perhaps with a significant investment of effort or money, all dedicated toward supporting a
deep work task, you increase the perceived importance of the task. This boost in importance reduces
your mind’s instinct to procrastinate and delivers an injection of motivation and energy. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 89, loc. 1355-1359 In all
of these examples, it’s not just the change of environment or seeking of quiet that enables more
depth. The dominant force is the psychology of committing so seriously to the task at hand. To put
yourself in an exotic location to focus on a writing project, or to take a week off from work just
to think, or to lock yourself in a hotel room until you complete an important invention: These
gestures push your deep goal to a level of mental priority that helps unlock the needed mental
resources. Sometimes to go deep, you must first go big. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 91, loc. 1391-1395 Don’t Work Alone Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 91, loc. 1395-1395 Don’t Work Alone Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 91, loc. 1395-1395 Don’t Work Alone The
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 91, loc. 1395-1396 The
relationship between deep work and collaboration is tricky. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 91, loc. 1396-1396 Both intuition and a growing body of
research underscore the reality that sharing a workspace with a large number of coworkers is
incredibly distracting—creating an environment that thwarts attempts to think seriously. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 92, loc. 1401-1402
emerge—the theory of serendipitous creativity. When Mark Zuckerberg decided to build the world’s
largest office, we can reasonably conjecture, this theory helped drive his decision, just as it has
driven many of the moves toward open workspaces elsewhere in Silicon Valley and beyond. (Other
less-exalted factors, like saving money and increasing supervision, also play a role, but they’re
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 92, loc. 1411-1413
emerge—the theory of serendipitous creativity. When Mark Zuckerberg decided to build the world’s
largest office, we can reasonably conjecture, this theory helped drive his decision, just as it has
driven many of the moves toward open workspaces elsewhere in Silicon Valley and beyond. (Other
less-exalted factors, like saving money and increasing supervision, also play a role, but they’re
not as sexy and are therefore less emphasized.) Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 92, loc. 1411-1414 This decision between promoting concentration and
promoting serendipity seems to indicate that deep work (an individual endeavor) is incompatible with
generating creative insights (a collaborative endeavor). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 93, loc. 1414-1415 We can, therefore, still dismiss the
depth-destroying open office concept without dismissing the innovation-producing theory of
serendipitous creativity. The key is to maintain both in a hub-and-spoke-style arrangement: Expose
yourself to ideas in hubs on a regular basis, but maintain a spoke in which to work deeply on what
you encounter. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 96, loc.
1466-1468 Brattain and Bardeen worked together during this period in a small lab, often side by
side, pushing each other toward better and more effective designs. These efforts consisted primarily
of deep work—but a type of deep work we haven’t yet encountered. Brattain would concentrate
intensely to engineer an experimental design that could exploit Bardeen’s latest theoretical
insight; then Bardeen Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
97, loc. 1477-1480 Brattain and Bardeen worked together during this period in a small lab, often
side by side, pushing each other toward better and more effective designs. These efforts consisted
primarily of deep work—but a type of deep work we haven’t yet encountered. Brattain would
concentrate intensely to engineer an experimental design that could exploit Bardeen’s latest
theoretical insight; then Bardeen would concentrate intensely to make sense of what Brattain’s
latest experiments revealed, trying to expand his theoretical framework to match the observations.
This back-and-forth represents a collaborative form of deep work (common in academic circles) that
leverages what I call the whiteboard effect. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 97, loc. 1477-1482 Brattain and Bardeen worked together during this period in
a small lab, often side by side, pushing each other toward better and more effective designs. These
efforts consisted primarily of deep work—but a type of deep work we haven’t yet encountered.
Brattain would concentrate intensely to engineer an experimental design that could exploit Bardeen’s
latest theoretical insight; then Bardeen would concentrate intensely to make sense of what
Brattain’s latest experiments revealed, trying to expand his theoretical framework to match the
observations. This back-and-forth represents a collaborative form of deep work (common in academic
circles) that leverages what I call the whiteboard effect. For some types of problems, working with
someone else at the proverbial shared whiteboard can push you deeper than if you were working alone.
The presence of the other party waiting for your next insight—be it someone physically in the same
room or collaborating with you virtually—can short-circuit the natural instinct to avoid depth. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 97, loc. 1477-1484 The
success of Building 20 and Bell Labs indicates that isolation is not required for productive deep
work. Indeed, their example indicates that for many types of work—especially when pursuing
innovation—collaborative deep work can yield better results. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 97, loc. 1485-1487 The success of Building 20 and Bell
Labs indicates that isolation is not required for productive deep work. Indeed, their example
indicates that for many types of work—especially when pursuing innovation—collaborative deep work
can yield better results. This strategy, therefore, asks that you consider this option in
contemplating how best to integrate depth into your professional life. In doing so, however, keep
the following two guidelines in mind. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 97, loc. 1485-1488 First, distraction remains a destroyer of depth. Therefore,
the hub-and-spoke model provides a crucial template. Separate your pursuit of serendipitous
encounters from your efforts to think deeply and build on these inspirations. You should try to
optimize each effort separately, as opposed to mixing them together into a sludge that impedes both
goals. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 98, loc.
1488-1491 Second, even when you retreat to a spoke to think deeply, when it’s reasonable to leverage
the whiteboard effect, do so. By working side by side with someone on a problem, you can push each
other toward deeper levels of depth, and therefore toward the generation of more and more valuable
output as compared to working alone. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 98, loc. 1491-1493 When it comes to deep work, in other words, consider the
use of collaboration when appropriate, as it can push your results to a new level. At the same time,
don’t lionize this quest for interaction and positive randomness to the point where it crowds out
the unbroken concentration ultimately required to wring something useful out of the swirl of ideas
all around us. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 98, loc.
1494-1496 Execute Like a Business Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 98, loc. 1496-1497 Christensen walked through the basics of disruption: entrenched
companies are often unexpectedly dethroned by start-ups that begin with cheap offerings at the low
end of the market, but then, over time, improve their cheap products just enough to begin to steal
high-end market share. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
98, loc. 1499-1501 Christensen walked through the basics of disruption: entrenched companies are
often unexpectedly dethroned by start-ups that begin with cheap offerings at the low end of the
market, but then, over time, improve their cheap products just enough to begin to steal high-end
market share. Grove recognized that Intel faced this threat from low-end processors produced by
upstart companies like AMD and Cyrix. Fueled by his newfound understanding of disruption, Grove
devised the strategy that led to the Celeron family of processors—a lower-performance offering that
helped Intel successfully fight off the challenges from below. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 98, loc. 1499-1504 As Christensen recalls, Grove asked
him during a break in this meeting, “How do I do this?” Christensen responded with a discussion of
business strategy, explaining how Grove could set up a new business unit and so on. Grove cut him
off with a gruff reply: “You are such a naïve academic. I asked you how to do it, and you told me
what I should do. I know what I need to do. I just don’t know how to do it.” Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 99, loc. 1504-1507 As Christensen recalls,
Grove asked him during a break in this meeting, “How do I do this?” Christensen responded with a
discussion of business strategy, explaining how Grove could set up a new business unit and so on.
Grove cut him off with a gruff reply: “You are such a naïve academic. I asked you how to do it, and
you told me what I should do. I know what I need to do. I just don’t know how to do it.” As
Christensen later Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 99,
loc. 1504-1508 this division between what and how is crucial but is overlooked in the professional
world. It’s often straightforward to identify a strategy needed to achieve a goal, but what trips up
companies is figuring out how to execute the strategy once identified. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 99, loc. 1508-1510 The 4 Disciplines of Execution,
which built on extensive consulting case studies to describe four “disciplines” (abbreviated, 4DX)
for helping companies successfully implement high-level strategies. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 99, loc. 1510-1512 this gap between what and how was
relevant to my personal quest to spend more time working deeply. Just as Andy Grove had identified
the importance Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 99, loc.
1512-1513 this gap between what and how was relevant to my personal quest to spend more time working
deeply. Just as Andy Grove had identified the importance of competing in the low-end processor
market, I had identified the importance of prioritizing depth. What I needed was help figuring out
how to execute this strategy. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 99, loc. 1512-1514 Discipline #1: Focus on the Wildly Important Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1519-1520 “The more you try to do,
the less you actually accomplish.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 100, loc. 1520-1521 execution should be aimed at a small number of “wildly important
goals.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 100, loc.
1521-1522 execution should be aimed at a small number of “wildly important goals.” This simplicity
will help focus an organization’s energy to a sufficient intensity to ignite real results. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1521-1522 you
should identify a small number of ambitious outcomes to pursue with your deep work hours. The
general exhortation to “spend more time working deeply” doesn’t spark a lot of enthusiasm. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1523-1524 you
should identify a small number of ambitious outcomes to pursue with your deep work hours. The
general exhortation to “spend more time working deeply” doesn’t spark a lot of enthusiasm. To
instead have a specific goal that would return tangible and substantial professional benefits will
generate a steadier stream of enthusiasm. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1523-1525 “The Art of Focus,” David Brooks endorsed this approach of
letting ambitious goals drive focused behavior, explaining: “If you want to win the war for
attention, don’t try to say ‘no’ to the trivial distractions you find on the information
smorgasbord; try to say ‘yes’ to the subject that arouses a terrifying longing, and let the
terrifying longing crowd out everything else.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1525-1528 Discipline #2: Act on the Lead Measures Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1531-1532 Once you’ve
identified a wildly important goal, you need to measure your success. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1532-1533 Once you’ve identified a wildly
important goal, you need to measure your success. In 4DX, there are two types of metrics for this
purpose: lag measures and lead measures. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1532-1534 Once you’ve identified a wildly important goal, you need
to measure your success. In 4DX, there are two types of metrics for this purpose: lag measures and
lead measures. Lag measures describe the thing you’re ultimately trying to improve. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 100, loc. 1532-1534 lag measures is
that they come too late to change your behavior: “When you receive them, the performance that drove
them is already in the past.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 101, loc. 1535-1536 Lead measures, on the other hand, “measure the new behaviors that
will drive success on the lag measures.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 101, loc. 1537-1537 lead measures turn your attention to improving the
behaviors you directly control in the near future that will then have a positive impact on your
long-term goals. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 101,
loc. 1539-1540 the relevant lead measure: time spent in a state of deep work dedicated toward your
wildly important goal. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
101, loc. 1541-1542 Discipline #3: Keep a Compelling Scoreboard Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 101, loc. 1546-1546 “People play differently when they’re
keeping score,” the 4DX authors explain. They then elaborate that when attempting to drive your
team’s engagement toward your organization’s wildly important goal, it’s important that they have a
public place to record and track their lead measures. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 101, loc. 1547-1549 “People play differently when they’re keeping
score,” the 4DX authors explain. They then elaborate that when attempting to drive your team’s
engagement toward your organization’s wildly important goal, it’s important that they have a public
place to record and track their lead measures. This scoreboard creates a sense of competition that
drives them to focus on these measures, even when other demands vie for their attention. It also
provides a reinforcing source of motivation. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 101, loc. 1547-1550 “People play differently when they’re keeping score,” the
4DX authors explain. They then elaborate that when attempting to drive your team’s engagement toward
your organization’s wildly important goal, it’s important that they have a public place to record
and track their lead measures. This scoreboard creates a sense of competition that drives them to
focus on these measures, even when other demands vie for their attention. It also provides a
reinforcing source of motivation. Once the team notices their success with a lead measure, they
become invested in perpetuating this performance. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 101, loc. 1547-1551 for an individual focused on deep work, hours spent
working deeply should be the lead measure. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 102, loc. 1551-1552 for an individual focused on deep work, hours spent
working deeply should be the lead measure. It follows, therefore, that the individual’s scoreboard
should be a physical artifact in the workspace that displays the individual’s current deep work hour
count. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 102, loc.
1551-1553 simple but effective solution for implementing this scoreboard. I took a piece of card
stock and divided it into rows, one for each week of the current semester. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 102, loc. 1554-1555 simple but effective
solution for implementing this scoreboard. I took a piece of card stock and divided it into rows,
one for each week of the current semester. I then labeled each row with the dates of the week and
taped it to the wall next to my computer monitor (where it couldn’t be ignored). As each week
progressed, I kept track of the hours spent in deep work that week with a simple tally of tick marks
in that week’s row. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
102, loc. 1554-1557 simple but effective solution for implementing this scoreboard. I took a piece
of card stock and divided it into rows, one for each week of the current semester. I then labeled
each row with the dates of the week and taped it to the wall next to my computer monitor (where it
couldn’t be ignored). As each week progressed, I kept track of the hours spent in deep work that
week with a simple tally of tick marks in that week’s row. To maximize the motivation generated by
this scoreboard, whenever I reached an important milestone in an academic paper (e.g., solving a key
proof), I would circle the tally mark corresponding to the hour where I finished the result. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 102, loc. 1554-1558 This
served two purposes. First, it allowed me to connect, at a visceral level, accumulated deep work
hours and tangible results. Second, it helped calibrate my expectations for how many hours of deep
work were needed per result. This reality (which was larger than I first assumed) helped spur me to
squeeze more such hours into each week. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 102, loc. 1559-1561 Discipline #4: Create a Cadence of Accountability Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 102, loc. 1561-1562 The 4DX
authors elaborate that the final step to help maintain a focus on lead measures is to put in place
“a rhythm of regular and frequent meetings of any team that owns a wildly important goal.” Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 102, loc. 1563-1564 The 4DX
authors elaborate that the final step to help maintain a focus on lead measures is to put in place
“a rhythm of regular and frequent meetings of any team that owns a wildly important goal.” During
these meetings, the team members must confront their scoreboard, commit to specific actions to help
improve the score before the next meeting, and describe what happened with the commitments they made
at the last meeting. They note that this review can be condensed to only a few minutes, but it must
be regular for its effect to be felt. The authors argue that it’s this discipline Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 102, loc. 1563-1566 The 4DX authors
elaborate that the final step to help maintain a focus on lead measures is to put in place “a rhythm
of regular and frequent meetings of any team that owns a wildly important goal.” During these
meetings, the team members must confront their scoreboard, commit to specific actions to help
improve the score before the next meeting, and describe what happened with the commitments they made
at the last meeting. They note that this review can be condensed to only a few minutes, but it must
be regular for its effect to be felt. The authors argue that it’s this discipline where “execution
really happens.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 102,
loc. 1563-1567 this doesn’t exempt you from the need for regular accountability. In multiple places
throughout this book I discuss and recommend the habit of a weekly review in which you make a plan
for the workweek ahead Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
103, loc. 1568-1569 I used a weekly review to look over my scoreboard to celebrate good weeks, help
understand what led to bad weeks, and most important, figure out how to ensure a good score for the
days ahead. This led me to adjust my schedule to meet the needs of my lead measure—enabling
significantly more deep work than if I had avoided such reviews altogether. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 103, loc. 1569-1572 The 4DX framework is based
on the fundamental premise that execution is more difficult than strategizing. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 103, loc. 1573-1574 execution is more
difficult than strategizing. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 103, loc. 1573-1574 its inventors managed to isolate a few basic disciplines that seem to
work particularly well in conquering this difficulty. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 103, loc. 1574-1575 it was not so much the intensity of my deep
work periods that increased, but instead their regularity. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 103, loc. 1579-1580 Be Lazy Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 104, loc. 1584-1584 In a 2012 article written for a New
York Times blog, the essayist and cartoonist Tim Kreider provided a memorable self-description: “I
am not busy. I am the laziest ambitious person I know.” Kreider’s distaste for frenetic work,
however, was put to the test in the months leading up to the writing of his post. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 104, loc. 1584-1586 “I’ve insidiously
started, because of professional obligations, to become busy… every morning my in-box was full of
e-mails asking me to do things I did not want to do or presenting me with problems that I now had to
solve.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 104, loc.
1587-1588 “I’ve insidiously started, because of professional obligations, to become busy… every
morning my in-box was full of e-mails asking me to do things I did not want to do or presenting me
with problems that I now had to solve.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 104, loc. 1587-1588 “I’ve insidiously started, because of professional
obligations, to become busy… every morning my in-box was full of e-mails asking me to do things I
did not want to do or presenting me with problems that I now had to solve.” His solution? He fled to
what he calls an “undisclosed location”: a place with no TV and no Internet (going online requires a
bike ride to the local library), and where he could remain nonresponsive to the pinprick onslaught
of small obligations that seem harmless in isolation but aggregate to serious injury to his deep
work habit. “I’ve remembered about buttercups, stink bugs and the stars,” Kreider says about his
retreat from activity. “I read. And I’m finally getting some real writing done for the first time in
months.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 104, loc.
1587-1592 solution? He fled to what he calls an “undisclosed location”: a place with no TV and no
Internet (going online requires a bike ride to the local library), and where he could remain
nonresponsive to the pinprick onslaught of small obligations that seem harmless in isolation but
aggregate to serious injury to his deep work habit. “I’ve remembered about buttercups, stink bugs
and the stars,” Kreider says about his retreat from activity. “I read. And I’m finally getting some
real Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 104, loc.
1589-1592 solution? He fled to what he calls an “undisclosed location”: a place with no TV and no
Internet (going online requires a bike ride to the local library), and where he could remain
nonresponsive to the pinprick onslaught of small obligations that seem harmless in isolation but
aggregate to serious injury to his deep work habit. “I’ve remembered about buttercups, stink bugs
and the stars,” Kreider says about his retreat from activity. “I read. And I’m finally getting some
real writing done for the first time in months.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 104, loc. 1589-1592 His move to an undisclosed location was instead
motivated by a surprising but practical insight: It made him better at his job. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 104, loc. 1594-1595 Idleness is not just
a vacation, an indulgence or a vice; it is as indispensable to the brain as vitamin D is to the
body, and deprived of it we suffer a mental affliction as disfiguring as rickets… it is,
paradoxically, necessary to getting any work Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 104, loc. 1595-1597 Idleness is not just a vacation, an indulgence or a vice;
it is as indispensable to the brain as vitamin D is to the body, and deprived of it we suffer a
mental affliction as disfiguring as rickets… it is, paradoxically, necessary to getting any work
done. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 104, loc.
1595-1597 he’s not referencing shallow tasks. For the most part, the more time you can spend
immersed in shallow work the more of it that gets accomplished. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 105, loc. 1598-1599 This strategy argues that you should
follow Kreider’s lead by injecting regular and substantial freedom from professional concerns into
your day, providing you with the idleness paradoxically required to get (deep) work done. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 105, loc. 1600-1602 many
ways to accomplish this goal. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 105, loc. 1602-1602 retreating from the world of shallow tasks altogether by hiding out
in an “undisclosed location,” but this isn’t practical for most people. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 105, loc. 1603-1604 retreating from the world
of shallow tasks altogether by hiding out in an “undisclosed location,” but this isn’t practical for
most people. Instead, I want to suggest a more applicable but still quite powerful heuristic: At the
end of the workday, shut down your consideration of work issues until the next morning—no
after-dinner e-mail check, no mental replays of conversations, and no scheming about how you’ll
handle an upcoming challenge; shut down work thinking completely. If you need more time, then extend
your workday, but once you shut down, your mind must be left free to encounter Kreider’s buttercups,
stink bugs, and stars. Before describing some tactics that support this strategy, I want to first
explore why a shutdown will be profitable to your ability to produce valuable output. We have, of
course, Tim Kreider’s personal endorsement, but it’s worth taking the time to also understand the
science behind the value of downtime. A closer examination Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 105, loc. 1603-1610 a more applicable but still quite powerful
heuristic: At the end of the workday, shut down your consideration of work issues until the next
morning—no Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 105, loc.
1604-1605 a more applicable but still quite powerful heuristic: At the end of the workday, shut down
your consideration of work issues until the next morning—no after-dinner e-mail check, no mental
replays of conversations, and no scheming about how you’ll handle an upcoming challenge; shut down
work thinking completely. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 105, loc. 1604-1606 a more applicable but still quite powerful heuristic: At the end of the
workday, shut down your consideration of work issues until the next morning—no after-dinner e-mail
check, no mental replays of conversations, and no scheming about how you’ll handle an upcoming
challenge; shut down work thinking completely. If you need more time, then extend your workday, but
once you shut down, your mind must be left free to encounter Kreider’s buttercups, stink bugs, and
stars. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 105, loc.
1604-1607 why a shutdown will be profitable to your ability to produce valuable output. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 105, loc. 1608-1608 the science
behind the value of downtime. A closer examination of this literature reveals the following three
possible explanations for this value. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 105, loc. 1609-1610 Reason #1: Downtime Aids Insights Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 105, loc. 1610-1611 2006 paper that appeared in
the journal Science: The scientific literature has emphasized the benefits of conscious deliberation
in decision making for hundreds of years… The question addressed here is whether this view is
justified. We hypothesize that it is not. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 106, loc. 1612-1614 The authors of this study, led by the Dutch psychologist
Ap Dijksterhuis, set out to prove that some decisions are better left to your unconscious mind to
untangle. In other words, to actively try to work through these decisions will lead to a worse
outcome than loading up the relevant information and then moving on to something else while letting
the subconscious layers of your mind mull things over. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 106, loc. 1615-1617 The authors of this study, led by the Dutch
psychologist Ap Dijksterhuis, set out to prove that some decisions are better left to your
unconscious mind to untangle. In other words, to actively try to work through these decisions will
lead to a worse outcome than loading up the relevant information and then moving on to something
else while letting the subconscious layers of your mind mull things over. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 106, loc. 1615-1617 Observations from
experiments such as this one led Dijksterhuis and his collaborators to introduce unconscious thought
theory (UTT)—an attempt to understand the different roles conscious and unconscious deliberation
play in decision making. At a high level, this theory proposes that for decisions that require the
application of strict rules, the conscious mind must be involved. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 106, loc. 1621-1624 Observations from experiments such as
this one led Dijksterhuis and his collaborators to introduce unconscious thought theory (UTT)—an
attempt to understand the different roles conscious and unconscious deliberation play in decision
making. At a high level, this theory proposes that for decisions that require the application of
strict rules, the conscious mind must be involved. For example, if you need to do a math
calculation, only your conscious mind is able to follow the precise arithmetic rules needed for
correctness. On the other hand, for decisions that involve large amounts of information and multiple
vague, and perhaps even conflicting, constraints, your unconscious mind is well suited to tackle the
issue. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 106, loc.
1621-1626 Observations from experiments such as this one led Dijksterhuis and his collaborators to
introduce unconscious thought theory (UTT)—an attempt to understand the different roles conscious
and unconscious deliberation play in decision making. At a high level, this theory proposes that for
decisions that require the application of strict rules, the conscious mind must be involved. For
example, if you need to do a math calculation, only your conscious mind is able to follow the
precise arithmetic rules needed for correctness. On the other hand, for decisions that involve large
amounts of information and multiple vague, and perhaps even conflicting, constraints, your
unconscious mind is well suited to tackle the issue. UTT hypothesizes that this is due to the fact
that these regions of your brain have more neuronal bandwidth available, allowing them to move
around more information and sift through more potential solutions than your conscious centers of
thinking. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 106, loc.
1621-1628 Observations from experiments such as this one led Dijksterhuis and his collaborators to
introduce unconscious thought theory (UTT)—an attempt to understand the different roles conscious
and unconscious deliberation play in decision making. At a high level, this theory proposes that for
decisions that require the application of strict rules, the conscious mind must be involved. For
example, if you need to do a math calculation, only your conscious mind is able to follow the
precise arithmetic rules needed for correctness. On the other hand, for decisions that involve large
amounts of information and multiple vague, and perhaps even conflicting, constraints, your
unconscious mind is well suited to tackle the issue. UTT hypothesizes that this is due to the fact
that these regions of your brain have more neuronal bandwidth available, allowing them to move
around more information and sift through more potential solutions than your conscious centers of
thinking. Your conscious mind, according to this theory, is like a home computer on which you can
run carefully written programs that return correct answers to limited problems, whereas your
unconscious mind is like Google’s vast data centers, in which statistical algorithms sift through
terabytes of unstructured information, teasing out surprising useful solutions to difficult
questions. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 106, loc.
1621-1630 The implication of this line of research is that providing your conscious brain time to
rest enables your unconscious mind to take a shift sorting through your most complex professional
challenges. A shutdown habit, therefore, is not necessarily reducing the amount of time you’re
engaged in productive work, but is instead diversifying the type of work you deploy. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 107, loc. 1631-1633 Reason #2:
Downtime Helps Recharge the Energy Needed to Work Deeply Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 107, loc. 1633-1634 A frequently cited 2008 paper appearing in
the journal Psychological Science describes a simple experiment. Subjects were split into two
groups. One group was asked to take a walk on a wooded path in an arboretum near the Ann Arbor,
Michigan, campus where the study was conducted. The other group was sent on a walk through the
bustling center of the city. Both groups were then given a concentration-sapping task called
backward digit-span. The core finding of the study is that the nature group performed up to 20
percent better on the task. The nature advantage still held the next week when the researchers
brought back the same subjects and switched the locations: It wasn’t the people who determined
performance, but whether or not they got a chance to prepare by walking through the woods. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 107, loc. 1634-1640 The
core finding of the study is that the nature group performed up to 20 percent better on the task.
The nature advantage still held the next week when the researchers brought back the same subjects
and switched the locations: It wasn’t the people who determined performance, but whether or not they
got a chance Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 107, loc.
1637-1640 The core finding of the study is that the nature group performed up to 20 percent better
on the task. The nature advantage still held the next week when the researchers brought back the
same subjects and switched the locations: It wasn’t the people who determined performance, but
whether or not they got a chance to prepare by walking through the woods. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 107, loc. 1637-1640 attention restoration
theory (ART), which claims that spending time in nature can improve your ability to concentrate. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 107, loc. 1641-1641
attention restoration theory (ART), which claims that spending time in nature can improve your
ability to concentrate. This theory, which was first proposed in the 1980s by the University of
Michigan psychologists Rachel Kaplan and Stephen Kaplan (the latter of which co-authored the 2008
study discussed here, along with Marc Berman and John Jonides), is based on the concept of attention
fatigue. To concentrate requires what ART calls directed attention. This resource is finite: If you
exhaust it, you’ll struggle to concentrate. (For our purposes, we can think of this resource as the
same thing as Baumeister’s limited willpower reserves we discussed in the introduction to this rule.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 107, loc. 1641-1645 The
2008 study argues that walking on busy city streets requires you to use directed attention, as you
must navigate complicated tasks like figuring out when to cross a street to not get run over, or
when to maneuver around the slow group of tourists blocking the sidewalk. After just fifty minutes
of this focused navigation, the subject’s store of directed attention was low. Walking through
nature, by contrast, exposes you to what lead author Marc Berman calls “inherently fascinating
stimuli,” using sunsets as an example. These stimuli “invoke attention modestly, allowing
focused-attention mechanisms a chance to replenish.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 108, loc. 1646-1650 when walking through nature, you’re freed
from having to direct your attention, as there are few challenges to navigate (like crowded street
crossings), and experience enough interesting stimuli to keep your mind sufficiently occupied to
avoid the need to actively aim your attention. This state allows your directed attention resources
time to replenish. After fifty minutes of such replenishment, the subjects enjoyed a boost in their
concentration. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 108,
loc. 1651-1654 The core mechanism of this theory is the idea that you can restore your ability to
direct your attention if you give this activity a rest. Walking in nature provides such a mental
respite, but so, too, can any number of relaxing activities so long as they provide similar
“inherently fascinating stimuli” and freedom from directed concentration. Having a casual
conversation with a friend, listening to music while making dinner, playing a game with your kids,
going for a run—the types of activities that will fill your time in the evening if you enforce a
work shutdown—play the same attention-restoring role as walking in nature. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 109, loc. 1658-1662 On the other hand, if you
keep interrupting your evening to check and respond to e-mail, or put aside a few Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 109, loc. 1663-1663 On the other hand, if
you keep interrupting your evening to check and respond to e-mail, or put aside a few hours after
dinner to catch up on an approaching deadline, you’re robbing your directed attention centers of the
uninterrupted rest they need for restoration. Even if these work dashes consume only a small amount
of time, they prevent you from reaching the levels of deeper relaxation in which attention
restoration can occur. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
109, loc. 1663-1665 if you keep interrupting your evening to check and respond to e-mail, or put
aside a few hours after dinner to catch up on an approaching deadline, you’re robbing your directed
attention centers of the uninterrupted rest they need for restoration. Even if these work dashes
consume only a small amount of time, they prevent you from reaching the levels of deeper relaxation
in which attention restoration can occur. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 109, loc. 1663-1665 if you keep interrupting your evening to check and respond
to e-mail, or put aside a few hours after dinner to catch up on an approaching deadline, you’re
robbing your directed attention centers of the uninterrupted rest they need for restoration. Even if
these work dashes consume only a small amount of time, they prevent you from reaching the levels of
deeper relaxation in which attention restoration can occur. Only the confidence that you’re done
with work until the next day can convince your brain to downshift to the level where it can begin to
recharge for the next day to follow. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 109, loc. 1663-1667 trying to squeeze a little more work out of your evenings
might reduce your effectiveness the next day enough that you end up getting less done than if you
had instead respected a shutdown. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 109, loc. 1667-1668 Reason #3: The Work That Evening Downtime Replaces Is Usually Not
That Important Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 109,
loc. 1668-1669 deliberate practice is the systematic stretching of your ability for a given skill.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 109, loc. 1671-1672
deliberate practice is the systematic stretching of your ability for a given skill. It is the
activity required to get better at something. Deep work and deliberate practice, as I’ve argued,
overlap substantially. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
109, loc. 1671-1672 In Ericsson’s seminal 1993 paper on the topic, titled “The Role of Deliberate
Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance,” he dedicates a section to reviewing what the
research literature reveals about an individual’s capacity for cognitively demanding work. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc. 1674-1675 In
Ericsson’s seminal 1993 paper on the topic, titled “The Role of Deliberate Practice in the
Acquisition of Expert Performance,” he dedicates a section to reviewing what the research literature
reveals about an individual’s capacity for cognitively demanding work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc. 1674-1675 In Ericsson’s seminal 1993 paper
on the topic, titled “The Role of Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance,” he
dedicates a section to reviewing what the research literature reveals about an individual’s capacity
for cognitively demanding work. Ericsson notes that for a novice, somewhere Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc. 1674-1676 for a novice, somewhere
around an hour a day of intense concentration seems to be a limit, while for experts this number can
expand to as many as four hours—but rarely more. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc. 1676-1677 One of the studies cited, for example, catalogs the
practice habits of a group of elite violin players training at Berlin’s Universität der Künste. This
study found the elite players average around three and a half hours per day in a state of deliberate
practice, usually separated into two distinct periods. The less accomplished players spent less time
in a state of depth. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
110, loc. 1677-1680 your capacity for deep work in a given day is limited. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc. 1680-1680 your capacity for deep work
in a given day is limited. If you’re careful about your schedule (using, for example, the type of
productivity strategies described in Rule #4), you should hit your daily deep work capacity during
your workday. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc.
1680-1682 by evening, you’re beyond the point where you can continue to effectively work deeply. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc. 1682-1683 by
evening, you’re beyond the point where you can continue to effectively work deeply. Any work you do
fit into the night, therefore, won’t be the type of high-value activities that really advance your
career; your efforts will instead likely be confined to low-value shallow tasks (executed at a slow,
low-energy pace). By deferring evening work, in other words, you’re not missing out on much of
importance. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc.
1682-1685 general strategy of maintaining a strict endpoint to your workday. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 110, loc. 1686-1687 To succeed with this
strategy, you must first accept the commitment that once your workday shuts down, you cannot allow
even the smallest incursion of professional concerns into your field of attention. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 111, loc. 1687-1689 checking e-mail, as
well as browsing work-related websites. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 111, loc. 1689-1689 even a brief intrusion of work can generate a
self-reinforcing stream of distraction that impedes Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 111, loc. 1689-1690 even a brief intrusion of work can generate a
self-reinforcing stream of distraction that impedes the shutdown advantages described earlier for a
long time to follow Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
111, loc. 1689-1690 Another key commitment for succeeding with this strategy is to support your
commitment to shutting down with a strict shutdown ritual that you use at the end of the workday to
maximize the probability that you succeed. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 111, loc. 1692-1694 this ritual should ensure that every incomplete task,
goal, or project has been reviewed and that for each you have confirmed that either (1) you have a
plan you trust for its completion, or (2) it’s captured in a place where it will be revisited when
the time is right. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 111,
loc. 1694-1695 this ritual should ensure that every incomplete task, goal, or project has been
reviewed and that for each you have confirmed that either (1) you have a plan you trust for its
completion, or (2) it’s captured in a place where it will be revisited when the time is right. The
process should be an algorithm: a series of steps you always conduct, one after another. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 111, loc. 1694-1696 this
ritual should ensure that every incomplete task, goal, or project has been reviewed and that for
each you have confirmed that either (1) you have a plan you trust for its completion, or (2) it’s
captured in a place where it will be revisited when the time is right. The process should be an
algorithm: a series of steps you always conduct, one after another. When you’re done, have a set
phrase you say that indicates completion (to end my own ritual, I say, “Shutdown complete”). This
final step sounds cheesy, but it provides a simple cue to your mind that it’s safe to release
work-related thoughts for the rest of the day. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 111, loc. 1694-1698 The first thing I do is take a final look at my e-mail
inbox to ensure that there’s nothing requiring an urgent response before the day ends. The next
thing I do is transfer any new tasks that are on my mind or were scribbled down earlier in the day
into my official task lists. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 111, loc. 1700-1702 Once I have these task lists open, I quickly skim every task in every
list, and then look at Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
112, loc. 1703-1703 Once I have these task lists open, I quickly skim every task in every list, and
then look at the next few days on my calendar. These two actions ensure that there’s nothing urgent
I’m forgetting or any important Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 112, loc. 1703-1704 Once I have these task lists open, I quickly skim every task in every
list, and then look at the next few days on my calendar. These two actions ensure that there’s
nothing urgent I’m forgetting or any important deadlines or appointments sneaking up on me. I have,
at this point, reviewed everything that’s on my professional plate. To end the ritual, I use this
information to make a rough plan for the next day. Once the plan is created, I say, “Shutdown
complete,” and my work thoughts are done for the day. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 112, loc. 1703-1706 shutdown ritual might at first seem extreme,
but there’s a good reason for it: the Zeigarnik effect. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 112, loc. 1707-1707 shutdown ritual might at first seem extreme,
but there’s a good reason for it: the Zeigarnik effect. This effect, which is named for the
experimental work of the early-twentieth-century psychologist Bluma Zeigarnik, describes the ability
of incomplete tasks to dominate our attention. It tells us that if you simply stop whatever you are
doing at five p.m. and declare, “I’m done with work until tomorrow,” you’ll likely struggle to keep
your mind clear of professional issues, as the many obligations left unresolved in your mind will,
as in Bluma Zeigarnik’s experiments, keep battling for your attention throughout the evening (a
battle that they’ll often win). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 112, loc. 1707-1711 shutdown ritual might at first seem extreme, but there’s a good
reason for it: the Zeigarnik effect. This effect, which is named for the experimental work of the
early-twentieth-century psychologist Bluma Zeigarnik, describes the ability of incomplete tasks to
dominate our attention. It tells us that if you simply stop whatever you are doing at five p.m. and
declare, “I’m done with work until tomorrow,” you’ll likely struggle to keep your mind clear of
professional issues, as the many obligations left unresolved in your mind will, as in Bluma
Zeigarnik’s experiments, keep battling for your attention throughout the evening (a battle that
they’ll often win). At Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
112, loc. 1707-1712 there are always tasks left incomplete. The idea that you can ever reach a point
where Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 112, loc.
1712-1713 there are always tasks left incomplete. The idea that you can ever reach a point where all
your obligations are handled is a fantasy. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 112, loc. 1712-1713 The idea that you can ever reach a point where Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 112, loc. 1713-1713 we
don’t need to complete a task to get it off our minds. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 112, loc. 1713-1714 the psychologist Roy Baumeister, who wrote a
paper with E.J. Masicampo playfully titled “Consider It Done!” In this study, the two researchers
began by replicating the Zeigarnik effect in their subjects (in this case, the researchers assigned
a task and then cruelly engineered interruptions), but then found that they could significantly
reduce the effect’s impact by asking the subjects, soon after the interruption, to make a plan for
how they would later complete the incomplete task. To quote the paper: “Committing to a specific
plan for a goal may therefore not only facilitate attainment of the goal but may also free cognitive
resources for other pursuits.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 112, loc. 1714-1719 The shutdown ritual described earlier leverages this tactic to battle
the Zeigarnik effect. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
113, loc. 1719-1720 The shutdown ritual described earlier leverages this tactic to battle the
Zeigarnik effect. While it doesn’t force you to explicitly identify a plan for every single task in
your task list (a burdensome requirement), it does force you to capture every task in a common list,
and then review these tasks before making a plan for the next day. This ritual ensures that no task
will be forgotten: Each will be reviewed daily and tackled when the time is appropriate. Your mind,
in other words, is released from its duty to keep track of these obligations at every moment—your
shutdown ritual has taken over that responsibility. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 113, loc. 1719-1723 Shutdown rituals can become annoying, as they
add an extra ten to fifteen minutes to the end of your workday (and sometimes even more), but
they’re necessary for reaping the rewards of systematic idleness Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 113, loc. 1724-1725 Decades of work from multiple
different subfields within psychology all point toward the conclusion that regularly resting your
brain improves the quality of your deep work. When you work, work hard. When you’re done, be done.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 113, loc. 1728-1729
Decades of work from multiple different subfields within psychology all point toward the conclusion
that regularly resting your brain improves the quality of your deep work. When you work, work hard.
When you’re done, be done. Your average e-mail response time might suffer some, but you’ll more than
make up for this with the sheer volume of truly important work produced during the day by your
refreshed ability to dive deeper than your exhausted peers. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 113, loc. 1728-1731 Rule #2 Embrace Boredom Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 113, loc. 1731-1732 “You cannot
consider yourself as fulfilling this daily obligation unless you have stretched to the reaches of
your mental capacity.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
114, loc. 1745-1746 “I’ve recently been making more highly creative insights in my business life,”
he told me. “I’m convinced it’s related to this daily mental practice. This consistent strain has
built my mental muscle over years and years. This was not the goal when I started, but it is the
effect.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 115, loc.
1753-1755 an important reality about deep work: The ability to concentrate intensely is a skill that
must be trained. This idea might sound obvious once it’s pointed out, but it represents a departure
from how most people understand such matters. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 115, loc. 1757-1758 it’s common to treat undistracted concentration as a habit
like flossing—something that you know how to do and know is good for you, but that you’ve been
neglecting due to a lack of motivation. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 115, loc. 1758-1760 it’s common to treat undistracted concentration as a habit
like flossing—something that you know how to do and know is good for you, but that you’ve been
neglecting due to a lack of motivation. This mind-set is appealing because it implies you can
transform your working life from distracted to focused overnight if you can simply muster enough
motivation. But this understanding ignores the difficulty of focus and the hours of practice
necessary to strengthen your “mental muscle.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 115, loc. 1758-1762 Efforts to deepen your focus will struggle if you don’t
simultaneously wean your mind from a dependence on distraction. Much in the same way that athletes
must Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 116, loc.
1764-1765 Efforts to deepen your focus will struggle if you don’t simultaneously wean your mind from
a dependence on distraction. Much in the same way that athletes must take care of their bodies
outside of their training sessions, you’ll struggle to achieve the deepest levels of concentration
if you spend the rest of your time fleeing the slightest hint of boredom. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 116, loc. 1764-1766 Nass’s research revealed
that constant attention switching online has a lasting negative effect on your brain. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 116, loc. 1768-1769 Nass’s research
revealed that constant attention switching online has a lasting negative effect on your brain.
Here’s Nass summarizing these findings in a 2010 interview with NPR’s Ira Flatow: So we have scales
that allow us to divide up people into people who multitask all the time and people who rarely do,
and the differences are remarkable. People who multitask all the time can’t filter out irrelevancy.
They can’t manage a working memory. They’re chronically distracted. They initiate much larger parts
of their brain that are irrelevant to the task Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 116, loc. 1768-1772 Nass’s research revealed that constant attention
switching online has a lasting negative effect on your brain. Here’s Nass summarizing these findings
in a 2010 interview with NPR’s Ira Flatow: So we have scales that allow us to divide up people into
people who multitask all the time and people who rarely do, and the differences are remarkable.
People who multitask all the time can’t filter out irrelevancy. They can’t manage a working memory.
They’re chronically distracted. They initiate much larger parts of their brain that are irrelevant
to the task at hand… they’re pretty much mental wrecks. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 116, loc. 1768-1772 Flatow asks Nass whether the chronically
distracted recognize this rewiring of their brain: The people we talk with continually said, “look,
when I really have to concentrate, I turn off everything and I am laser-focused.” And unfortunately,
they’ve developed habits of mind that make it impossible for them to be laser-focused. They’re
suckers for irrelevancy. They just can’t keep on task. [emphasis mine] Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 116, loc. 1773-1776 Once your brain has become
accustomed to on-demand distraction, Nass discovered, it’s hard to shake the addiction even when you
want to concentrate. To put this more concretely: If every moment of potential boredom in your
life—say, having to wait five minutes in line or sit alone in a restaurant until a friend arrives—is
relieved with a quick glance at your smartphone, then your brain has likely been rewired to a point
where, like the “mental wrecks” in Nass’s research, it’s not ready for deep work—even if you
regularly schedule time to practice this concentration. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 116, loc. 1777-1781 Rule #1 taught you how to integrate deep work
into your schedule and Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
117, loc. 1782-1782 Rule #1 taught you how to integrate deep work into your schedule and support it
with routines and rituals designed to help you consistently reach the current limit of your
concentration ability. Rule #2 will help you significantly improve this limit. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1782-1783 Rule #1 taught you
how to integrate deep work into your schedule and support it with routines and rituals designed to
help you consistently reach the current limit Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1782-1783 Rule #1 taught you how to integrate deep work into your
schedule and support it with routines and rituals designed to help you consistently reach the
current limit of your concentration ability. Rule #2 will Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1782-1783 The strategies that follow are motivated by
the key idea that getting the most out of your deep work habit requires training, and as clarified
previously, this training must address two goals: improving your ability to concentrate intensely
and overcoming your desire for distraction. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1783-1785 The strategies that follow are motivated by the key idea
that getting the most out of your deep work habit requires training, and as clarified previously,
this training must address two goals: improving your ability to concentrate intensely and overcoming
your desire for distraction. These strategies cover a variety of approaches, from quarantining
distraction to mastering a special form of meditation, that combine to provide a practical road map
for your journey from a mind wrecked by constant distraction and unfamiliar with Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1783-1787 The strategies that
follow are motivated by the key idea that getting the most out of your deep work habit requires
training, and as clarified previously, this training must address two goals: improving your ability
to concentrate intensely and overcoming your desire for distraction. These strategies cover a
variety of approaches, from quarantining distraction to mastering a special form of meditation, that
combine to provide a practical road map for your journey from a mind wrecked by constant distraction
and unfamiliar with concentration, to an instrument that truly does deliver laser-like focus. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1783-1787 Don’t
Take Breaks from Distraction. Instead Take Breaks from Focus. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1788-1788 Many assume that they can switch
between a state of distraction and one of concentration as needed, but as I just argued, this
assumption is optimistic: Once you’re wired for distraction, you crave it. Motivated by this
reality, this strategy is designed to help you rewire your brain to a configuration better suited to
staying on task. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 117,
loc. 1789-1791 a popular suggestion for distraction addiction that doesn’t quite solve our problem:
the Internet Sabbath (sometimes called a digital detox). In its basic form, this ritual asks you to
put aside regular time—typically, one day a week—where Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1792-1793 a popular suggestion for distraction
addiction that doesn’t quite solve our problem: the Internet Sabbath (sometimes called a digital
detox). In its basic form, this ritual asks you to put aside regular time—typically, one day a
week—where you refrain from network technology. In the same way that the Sabbath in the Hebrew Bible
induces a period of quiet and reflection well suited to appreciate God and his works, the Internet
Sabbath is meant to remind you of what you miss when you are glued to a screen. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 117, loc. 1792-1795 All forms of this
advice provide some benefit, but once we see the distraction problem in terms of brain wiring, it
becomes clear that an Internet Sabbath cannot by itself cure a distracted brain. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 118, loc. 1801-1802 All forms of this
advice provide some benefit, but once we see the distraction problem in terms of brain wiring, it
becomes clear that an Internet Sabbath cannot by itself cure a distracted brain. If you eat healthy
just one day a week, you’re unlikely to lose weight, as the majority of your time is still spent
gorging. Similarly, if you spend just one day a week resisting distraction, you’re unlikely to
diminish your brain’s craving for these stimuli, as most of your time is still spent giving in to
it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 118, loc. 1801-1804
All forms of this advice provide some benefit, but once we see the distraction problem in terms of
brain wiring, it becomes clear that an Internet Sabbath cannot by itself cure a distracted brain. If
you eat healthy just one day a week, you’re unlikely to lose weight, as the majority of your time is
still spent gorging. Similarly, if you spend just one day a week resisting distraction, you’re
unlikely to diminish your brain’s craving for these stimuli, as most of your time is still spent
giving in to it. I Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 118,
loc. 1801-1805 alternative to the Internet Sabbath. Instead of scheduling the occasional break from
distraction so you can focus, you should instead schedule the occasional break from focus to give in
to distraction. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 118,
loc. 1805-1806 simplifying assumption that Internet use is synonymous with seeking distracting
stimuli. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 118, loc.
1806-1807 Similarly, let’s consider working in the absence of the Internet to be synonymous with
more focused work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 118,
loc. 1808-1809 With these rough categorizations established, the strategy works as follows: Schedule
in advance when you’ll use the Internet, and then avoid it altogether outside these times. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 118, loc. 1810-1811 With
these rough categorizations established, the strategy works as follows: Schedule in advance when
you’ll use the Internet, and then avoid it altogether outside these times. I suggest that you keep a
notepad near your computer at work. On this pad, record the next time you’re allowed to use the
Internet. Until you arrive at that time, absolutely no network connectivity is allowed—no matter how
tempting. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 118, loc.
1810-1813 The idea motivating this strategy is that the use of a distracting service does not, by
itself, reduce your brain’s ability to focus. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 119, loc. 1813-1814 The idea motivating this strategy is that the use of a
distracting service does not, by itself, reduce your brain’s ability to focus. It’s instead the
constant switching from low-stimuli/high-value activities to high-stimuli/low-value activities, at
the slightest hint of boredom or cognitive challenge, that teaches your mind to never tolerate an
absence of novelty. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
119, loc. 1813-1815 The idea motivating this strategy is that the use of a distracting service does
not, by itself, reduce your brain’s ability to focus. It’s instead the constant switching from
low-stimuli/high-value activities to high-stimuli/low-value activities, at the slightest hint of
boredom or cognitive challenge, that teaches your mind to never tolerate an absence of novelty. This
constant switching can be understood analogously as weakening the mental muscles responsible for
organizing the many sources vying for your attention. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 119, loc. 1813-1816 The idea motivating this strategy is that the
use of a distracting service does not, by itself, reduce your brain’s ability to focus. It’s instead
the constant switching from low-stimuli/high-value activities to high-stimuli/low-value activities,
at the slightest hint of boredom or cognitive challenge, that teaches your mind to never tolerate an
absence of novelty. This constant switching can be understood analogously as weakening the mental
muscles responsible for organizing the many sources vying for your attention. By segregating
Internet use (and therefore segregating distractions) you’re minimizing the number of times you give
in to distraction, and by doing so you let these attention-selecting muscles strengthen. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 119, loc. 1813-1818 if
you’ve scheduled your next Internet block thirty minutes from the current moment, and you’re
beginning to feel bored and crave distraction, the next thirty minutes of resistance become a
session of concentration calisthenics. A full day of scheduled distraction therefore becomes a full
day of similar mental training. While the basic idea behind this strategy is straightforward,
putting it into practice can be tricky. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 119, loc. 1818-1821 three important points to consider. Point #1: This
strategy works even if your job requires lots of Internet use and/or prompt e-mail replies. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 119, loc. 1822-1823 your
Internet blocks will be more numerous than those of someone whose job requires less connectivity.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 119, loc. 1824-1825
your Internet blocks will be more numerous than those of someone whose job requires less
connectivity. The total number or duration of your Internet blocks doesn’t matter nearly as much as
making sure that the integrity of your offline blocks remains intact. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 119, loc. 1824-1826 Point #2: Regardless of how you
schedule your Internet blocks, you must keep the time outside these blocks absolutely free from
Internet use. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 120, loc.
1831-1833 An inevitable issue you’ll face when executing this strategy is realizing early on in an
offline block that there’s some crucial piece of information online that you need to retrieve to
continue making progress on your current task. If your next Internet block doesn’t start for a
while, you might end up stuck. The temptation in this situation is to quickly give in, look up the
information, then return to your offline block. You must resist this temptation! Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 120, loc. 1834-1837 An inevitable issue
you’ll face when executing this strategy is realizing early on in an offline block that there’s some
crucial piece of information online that you need to retrieve to continue making progress on your
current task. If your next Internet block doesn’t start for a while, you might end up stuck. The
temptation in this situation is to quickly give in, look up the information, then return to your
offline block. You must resist this temptation! The Internet is seductive: You may think you’re just
retrieving a single key e-mail from your inbox, but you’ll find it hard to not glance at the other
“urgent” messages that have recently arrived. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 120, loc. 1834-1838 An inevitable issue you’ll face when executing this
strategy is realizing early on in an offline block that there’s some crucial piece of information
online that you need to retrieve to continue making progress on your current task. If your next
Internet block doesn’t start for a while, you might end up stuck. The temptation in this situation
is to quickly give in, look up the information, then return to your offline block. You must resist
this temptation! The Internet is seductive: You may think you’re just retrieving a single key e-mail
from your inbox, but you’ll find it hard to not glance at the other “urgent” messages that have
recently arrived. It doesn’t take many of these exceptions before your mind begins to treat the
barrier between Internet and offline blocks as permeable—diminishing the benefits of this strategy.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 120, loc. 1834-1840
It’s crucial in this situation, therefore, that you don’t immediately abandon an offline block, even
when stuck. If it’s possible, switch to another offline activity for the remainder of the current
block (or perhaps even fill in this time relaxing). If this is infeasible—perhaps you need to get
the current offline activity done promptly—then the correct response is to change your schedule so
that your next Internet block begins sooner. The key in making this change, however, is to not
schedule the next Internet block to occur immediately. Instead, enforce at least a five-minute gap
between the current moment and the next time you can go online. This gap is minor, so it won’t
excessively impede your progress, but from a behavioralist perspective, it’s substantial because it
separates the sensation of wanting to go online from the reward of actually doing so. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 120, loc. 1840-1846 Point #3:
Scheduling Internet use at home as well as at work can further improve your concentration training.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 121, loc. 1846-1847 If
you find yourself glued to a smartphone or laptop throughout your evenings and weekends, then it’s
likely that your behavior outside of work is undoing many of your attempts during the workday to
rewire your brain (which makes little distinction between the two settings). In this case, I would
suggest that you maintain the strategy of scheduling Internet use even after the workday is over.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 121, loc. 1848-1850
when scheduling Internet use after work, you can allow time-sensitive communication into your
offline blocks (e.g., texting with a friend to agree on where you’ll meet for dinner), as well as
time-sensitive information retrieval (e.g., looking up the location of the restaurant on your
phone). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 121, loc.
1851-1853 when scheduling Internet use after work, you can allow time-sensitive communication into
your offline blocks (e.g., texting with a friend to agree on where you’ll meet for dinner), as well
as time-sensitive information retrieval (e.g., looking up the location of the restaurant on your
phone). Outside of these pragmatic exceptions, however, when in an offline block, put your phone
away, ignore texts, and refrain from Internet usage. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 121, loc. 1851-1854 if the Internet plays a large and important
role in your evening entertainment, that’s fine: Schedule lots of long Internet blocks. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 121, loc. 1854-1855 if the Internet
plays a large and important role in your evening entertainment, that’s fine: Schedule lots of long
Internet blocks. The key here isn’t to avoid or even to reduce the total amount of time you spend
engaging in distracting behavior, but is instead to give yourself plenty of opportunities throughout
your evening to resist switching to these distractions at the slightest hint of boredom. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 121, loc. 1854-1857 this
strategy becomes particularly difficult outside work is when you’re forced to wait (for example,
standing in line at a store). It’s crucial in these situations that if you’re in an offline block,
you simply gird yourself for the temporary boredom, and fight through it with only the company of
your thoughts. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 122,
loc. 1857-1859 this strategy becomes particularly difficult outside work is when you’re forced to
wait (for example, standing in line at a store). It’s crucial in these situations that if you’re in
an offline block, you simply gird yourself for the temporary boredom, and fight through it with only
the company of your thoughts. To simply wait and be bored has become a novel experience in modern
life, but from the perspective of concentration training, it’s incredibly valuable. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 122, loc. 1857-1860 To summarize, to
succeed with deep work you must rewire your brain to be comfortable resisting distracting stimuli.
This doesn’t mean that you have to eliminate distracting behaviors; it’s sufficient that you instead
eliminate the ability of such behaviors to hijack your attention. The simple strategy proposed here
of scheduling Internet blocks goes a long way toward helping you regain this attention autonomy. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 122, loc. 1861-1864 Work
Like Teddy Roosevelt Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
122, loc. 1864-1865 inject the occasional dash of Rooseveltian intensity into your own workday. In
particular, identify a deep task (that is, something that requires deep work to complete) that’s
high on your priority list. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 123, loc. 1885-1886 inject the occasional dash of Rooseveltian intensity into your own workday.
In particular, identify a deep task (that is, something that requires deep work to complete) that’s
high on your priority list. Estimate how long you’d normally put aside for an obligation of this
type, then give yourself a hard deadline that drastically reduces this time. If possible, commit
publicly to the deadline—for example, by telling the person expecting the finished project when they
should expect it. If this isn’t possible (or if it puts your job in jeopardy), then motivate
yourself by setting a countdown timer on your phone and propping it up where you can’t avoid seeing
it as you work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 123,
loc. 1885-1890 there should be only one possible way to get the deep task done in time: working with
great intensity—no e-mail breaks, no daydreaming, no Facebook browsing, no repeated trips to the
coffee machine. Like Roosevelt at Harvard, attack the task with every free neuron until it gives way
under your unwavering barrage of concentration. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 124, loc. 1890-1892 Try this experiment no more than Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 124, loc. 1893-1893 Try this experiment no more
than once a week at first—giving your brain practice with intensity, but also giving it (and your
stress levels) time to rest in between. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 124, loc. 1893-1894 Try this experiment no more than once a week at
first—giving your brain practice with intensity, but also giving it (and your stress levels) time to
rest in between. Once you feel confident in your ability to trade concentration for completion time,
increase the frequency of these Roosevelt dashes. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 124, loc. 1893-1895 always keep your self-imposed deadlines right at the
edge of feasibility. You should be able to consistently beat the buzzer (or at least be close), but
to do so should Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 124,
loc. 1895-1896 always keep your self-imposed deadlines right at the edge of feasibility. You should
be able to consistently beat the buzzer (or at least be close), but to do so should require
teeth-gritting concentration. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 124, loc. 1895-1896 The main motivation for this strategy is straightforward. Deep work
requires levels of concentration well beyond where most knowledge workers are comfortable. Roosevelt
dashes leverage artificial deadlines to help you systematically increase the level you can regularly
achieve—providing, in some sense, interval training for the attention centers of your brain. An
additional benefit is that these dashes are incompatible with distraction (there’s no way you can
give in to distraction and still make your deadlines). Therefore, every completed dash provides a
session in which you’re potentially bored, and really want to seek more novel stimuli—but you
resist. As argued in the previous strategy, the more you practice resisting such urges, the easier
such resistance becomes. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 124, loc. 1897-1902 After a few months of deploying this strategy, your understanding of what it
means to focus will likely be transformed as you reach levels of intensity stronger than anything
you’ve experienced before. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 125, loc. 1902-1904 Meditate Productively Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 125, loc. 1905-1906 productive meditation. The goal of productive meditation
is to take a period in which you’re occupied physically but not mentally—walking, jogging, driving,
showering—and focus your attention on a single well-defined professional problem. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 125, loc. 1915-1917 productive
meditation. The goal of productive meditation is to take a period in which you’re occupied
physically but not mentally—walking, jogging, driving, showering—and focus your attention on a
single well-defined professional problem. Depending on your profession, this problem might be
outlining an article, writing a talk, making progress on a proof, or attempting to sharpen a
business strategy. As in mindfulness meditation, you must continue to bring your attention back to
the problem at hand when it wanders or stalls. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 125, loc. 1915-1919 You don’t necessarily need a serious session every day,
but your goal should be to participate in at least two or three such sessions in a typical week. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 126, loc. 1922-1923 finding
time for this strategy is easy, as it takes advantage of periods that would otherwise be wasted
(such as walking the dog or commuting to work), and if done right, can actually increase your
professional productivity instead of taking time away from your work. In fact, you might even
consider scheduling a walk during your workday specifically for the purpose of applying productive
meditation to your most pressing problem at the moment. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 126, loc. 1923-1926 (though they’re nice). I’m instead interested
in its ability to rapidly improve your ability to think deeply. In my experience, productive
meditation builds on both of the key ideas introduced at the beginning of this rule. By forcing you
to resist distraction and return your attention repeatedly to a well-defined problem, it helps
strengthen your distraction-resisting muscles, and by forcing you to push your focus deeper and
deeper on a single problem, it sharpens your concentration. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 126, loc. 1927-1930 To succeed with productive
meditation, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 126, loc.
1931-1931 two specific suggestions Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 127, loc. 1934-1935 Suggestion #1: Be Wary of Distractions and Looping Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 127, loc. 1935-1936 when you begin a
productive meditation session, your mind’s first act of rebellion will be to offer unrelated but
seemingly more interesting thoughts. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 127, loc. 1936-1937 When you notice your attention slipping away from the
problem at hand, gently remind yourself that you can return to that thought later, then redirect
your attention Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 127,
loc. 1939-1940 When you notice your attention slipping away from the problem at hand, gently remind
yourself that you can return to that thought later, then redirect your attention back. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 127, loc. 1939-1940 Distraction of
this type, in many ways, is the obvious enemy to defeat in developing a productive meditation habit.
A subtler, but equally effective adversary, is looping. When faced with a hard problem, your mind,
as it was evolved to do, will attempt Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 127, loc. 1940-1942 Distraction of this type, in many ways, is the obvious
enemy to defeat in developing a productive meditation habit. A subtler, but equally effective
adversary, is looping. When faced with a hard problem, your mind, as it was evolved to do, will
attempt to avoid excess expenditure of energy when possible. One way it might attempt to sidestep
this expenditure is by avoiding diving deeper into the problem by instead looping over and over
again on what you already know about Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 127, loc. 1940-1943 Distraction of this type, in many ways, is the obvious
enemy to defeat in developing a productive meditation habit. A subtler, but equally effective
adversary, is looping. When faced with a hard problem, your mind, as it was evolved to do, will
attempt to avoid excess expenditure of energy when possible. One way it might attempt to sidestep
this expenditure is by avoiding diving deeper into the problem by instead looping over and over
again on what you already know about it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 127, loc. 1940-1943 Distraction of this type, in many ways, is the obvious
enemy to defeat in developing a productive meditation habit. A subtler, but equally effective
adversary, is looping. When faced with a hard problem, your mind, as it was evolved to do, will
attempt to avoid excess expenditure of energy when possible. One way it might attempt to sidestep
this expenditure is by avoiding diving deeper into the problem by instead looping over and over
again on what you already know about it. For example, when working on a proof, my mind has a
tendency to rehash simple preliminary results, again and again, to avoid the harder work of building
on these results toward the needed solution. You must be on your guard for looping, as it can
quickly subvert an entire productive meditation session. When you notice it, remark to yourself that
you seem to be in a loop, then redirect your attention toward the next step. Suggestion #2:
Structure Your Deep Thinking “Thinking deeply” about a problem seems like a self-evident activity,
but in reality it’s not. When faced with a distraction-free mental landscape, a hard problem, and
time to think, the next steps can become surprisingly non-obvious. In my experience, it helps to
have some structure for this deep thinking process. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 127, loc. 1940-1950 You must be on your guard for looping, as it
can quickly subvert an entire productive meditation session. When you notice it, remark to yourself
that you seem to be in a loop, then redirect your attention toward the next step. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 127, loc. 1945-1946 Suggestion #2:
Structure Your Deep Thinking Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 127, loc. 1947-1947 When faced with a distraction-free mental landscape, a hard problem,
and time to think, the next steps can become surprisingly non-obvious. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 128, loc. 1948-1949 it helps to have some structure
for this deep thinking process. I suggest starting with a careful review of the Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 128, loc. 1949-1950 it helps to have some
structure for this deep thinking process. I suggest starting with a careful review of the relevant
variables for solving the problem and then storing these values in your working memory. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 128, loc. 1949-1951 Once the
relevant variables are identified, define the specific next-step question you need to answer using
these variables. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 128,
loc. 1953-1954 With the relevant variables stored and the next-step question identified, you now
have a specific target for your attention. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 128, loc. 1955-1956 Assuming you’re able to solve your next-step question, the
final step of this structured approach to deep thinking is to consolidate your gains by reviewing
clearly the answer you identified. At this point, you can push yourself to the next level of depth
by starting the process over. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 128, loc. 1956-1958 Assuming you’re able to solve your next-step question, the final step
of this structured approach to deep thinking is to consolidate your gains by reviewing clearly the
answer you identified. At this point, you can push yourself to the next level of depth by starting
the process over. This cycle of reviewing and storing variables, identifying and tackling the
next-step question, then consolidating your gains is like an intense workout routine for your
concentration ability. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
128, loc. 1956-1959 Assuming you’re able to solve your next-step question, the final step of this
structured approach to deep thinking is to consolidate your gains by reviewing clearly the answer
you identified. At this point, you can push yourself to the next level of depth by starting the
process over. This cycle of reviewing and storing variables, identifying and tackling the next-step
question, then consolidating your gains is like an intense workout routine for your concentration
ability. It will help you get more out of your productive meditation sessions and accelerate the
pace at which you improve your ability to go deep. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 128, loc. 1956-1960 Memorize a Deck of Cards Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 128, loc. 1961-1961 While training his brain,
he went from a struggling student with attention deficit disorder to graduating from a demanding
Australian university with first-class honors. He was soon accepted into the PhD program at one of
the country’s top universities, where he currently studies under a renowned philosopher. One
explanation for this transformation comes from research led by Henry Roediger, who runs the Memory
Lab at the University of Washington in Saint Louis. In 2014, Roediger and his collaborators sent a
team, equipped with a battery of cognitive tests, to the Extreme Memory Tournament held in San
Diego. They wanted to understand what differentiated these elite memorizers from the population Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 129, loc. 1971-1976 While
training his brain, he went from a struggling student with attention deficit disorder to graduating
from a demanding Australian university with first-class honors. He was soon accepted into the PhD
program at one of the country’s top universities, where he currently studies under a renowned
philosopher. One explanation for this transformation comes from research led by Henry Roediger, who
runs the Memory Lab at the University of Washington in Saint Louis. In 2014, Roediger and his
collaborators sent a team, equipped with a battery of cognitive tests, to the Extreme Memory
Tournament held in San Diego. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 129, loc. 1971-1976 One explanation for this transformation comes from research led by
Henry Roediger, who runs the Memory Lab at the University of Washington Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 129, loc. 1974-1975 In 2014, Roediger and his
collaborators sent a team, equipped with a battery of cognitive tests, to the Extreme Memory
Tournament held in San Diego. They wanted to understand what differentiated these elite memorizers
from the population at large. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 129, loc. 1975-1976 In 2014, Roediger and his collaborators sent a team, equipped with a
battery of cognitive tests, to the Extreme Memory Tournament held in San Diego. They wanted to
understand what differentiated these elite memorizers from the population at large. “We found that
one of the biggest differences between memory athletes and the rest of us is in a cognitive ability
that’s not a direct measure of memory at all but of attention,” explained Roediger in a New York
Times blog post (emphasis mine). The ability in question is called “attentional control,” and it
measures the subjects’ ability to maintain their focus on essential information. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 129, loc. 1975-1979 A side effect of
memory training, in other words, is an improvement in your general ability to concentrate. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 130, loc. 1979-1980 The
technique for card memorization I’ll teach you comes from someone who knows quite a bit about this
particular challenge: Ron White, a former USA Memory Champion and world record holder in card
memorization._ The first thing White emphasizes is that professional memory athletes never attempt
rote memorization, that is, where you simply look at information again and again, repeating it in
your head. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 130, loc.
1986-1989 The technique for card memorization I’ll teach you comes from someone who knows quite a
bit about this particular challenge: Ron White, a former USA Memory Champion and world record holder
in card memorization._ The first thing White emphasizes is that professional memory athletes never
attempt rote memorization, that is, where you simply look at information again and again, repeating
it in your head. This approach to retention, though popular among burned-out students,
misunderstands how our brains work. We’re not wired to quickly internalize abstract information. We
are, however, really good at remembering scenes. Think back to a recent memorable event in your
life: perhaps attending the opening session of a conference or meeting a friend you haven’t seen in
a while for a drink. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
130, loc. 1986-1992 The technique for card memorization I’ll teach you comes from someone who knows
quite a bit about this particular challenge: Ron White, a former USA Memory Champion and world
record holder in card memorization._ The first thing White emphasizes is that professional memory
athletes never attempt rote memorization, that is, where you simply look at information again and
again, repeating it in your head. This approach to retention, though popular among burned-out
students, misunderstands how our brains work. We’re not wired to quickly internalize abstract
information. We are, however, really good at remembering scenes. Think back to a recent memorable
event in your life: perhaps attending the opening session of a conference or meeting a friend you
haven’t seen in a while for a drink. Try to picture the scene as clearly as possible. Most people in
this scenario can conjure a surprisingly vivid recollection of the event—even though you made no
special effort to remember it at the time. If you systematically counted the unique details in this
memory, the total number of items would likely be surprisingly numerous. Your mind, in other words,
can quickly retain lots of detailed information—if it’s stored in the right way. Ron White’s card
memorization technique builds Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 130, loc. 1986-1995 The technique for card memorization I’ll teach you comes from someone
who knows quite a bit about this particular challenge: Ron White, a former USA Memory Champion and
world record holder in card memorization._ The first thing White emphasizes is that professional
memory athletes never attempt rote memorization, that is, where you simply look at information again
and again, repeating it in your head. This approach to retention, though popular among burned-out
students, misunderstands how our brains work. We’re not wired to quickly internalize abstract
information. We are, however, really good at remembering scenes. Think back to a recent memorable
event in your life: perhaps attending the opening session of a conference or meeting a friend you
haven’t seen in a while for a drink. Try to picture the scene as clearly as possible. Most people in
this scenario can conjure a surprisingly vivid recollection of the event—even though you made no
special effort to remember it at the time. If you systematically counted the unique details in this
memory, the total number of items would likely be surprisingly numerous. Your mind, in other words,
can quickly retain lots of detailed information—if it’s stored in the right way. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 130, loc. 1986-1995 The first thing White
emphasizes is that professional memory athletes never attempt rote memorization, that is, where you
simply look at information again and again, repeating it in your head. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 130, loc. 1988-1989 To prepare for this high-volume
memorization task, White recommends that you begin by cementing in your mind the mental image of
walking through five rooms in your home. Perhaps you come in the door, walk through your front
hallway, then turn into the downstairs bathroom, walk out the door and enter the guest bedroom, walk
into the kitchen, and then head down the stairs into your basement. In each room, conjure a clear
image of what you see. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
131, loc. 1996-1998 Once you can easily recall this mental walkthrough of a well-known location, fix
in your mind a collection of ten items in each of these rooms. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 131, loc. 1999-2000 Once you can easily recall this
mental walkthrough of a well-known location, fix in your mind a collection of ten items in each of
these rooms. White recommends that these items be large (and therefore more memorable), like a desk,
not a pencil. Next, establish an order in which you look at each of these items in each room. For
example, in the front hallway, you might look at the entry mat, then shoes on the floor by the mat,
then the bench above the shoes, and so on. Combined this is only fifty items, so add two more items,
perhaps in your backyard, to get to the full fifty-two items you’ll later need when connecting these
images to all the cards in a standard deck. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 131, loc. 1999-2003 Once you can easily recall this mental walkthrough of a
well-known location, fix in your mind a collection of ten items in each of these rooms. White
recommends that these items be large (and therefore more memorable), like a desk, not a pencil.
Next, establish an order in which you look at each of these items in each room. For example, in the
front hallway, you might look at the entry mat, then shoes on the floor by the mat, then the bench
above the shoes, and so on. Combined this is only fifty items, so add two more items, perhaps in
your backyard, to get to the full fifty-two items you’ll later need when connecting these images to
all the cards in a standard deck. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 131, loc. 1999-2003 Practice this mental exercise of walking through the rooms, and
looking at items in each room, in a set order. You should find that this type of memorization,
because it’s based on visual images of familiar places and things, will be much easier than the rote
memorizing you might remember from your school days. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 131, loc. 2004-2006 The second step in preparing to memorize a
deck of cards is to associate a memorable person or thing with each of the fifty-two possible cards.
To make this process easier, try to maintain some logical association between the card and the
corresponding image. White provides the example of associating Donald Trump with the King of
Diamonds, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 131, loc.
2006-2008 The second step in preparing to memorize a deck of cards is to associate a memorable
person or thing with each of the fifty-two possible cards. To make this process easier, try to
maintain some logical association between the card and the corresponding image. White provides the
example of associating Donald Trump with the King of Diamonds, as diamonds signify wealth. Practice
these associations until you can pull a card randomly from the deck and immediately recall the
associated image. As before, the use of memorable visual images and associations will simplify the
task of forming these connections. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 131, loc. 2006-2010 The second step in preparing to memorize a deck of cards is to
associate a memorable person or thing with each of the fifty-two possible cards. To make this
process easier, try to maintain some logical association between the card and the corresponding
image. White provides the example of associating Donald Trump with the King of Diamonds, as diamonds
signify wealth. Practice these associations until you can pull a card randomly from the deck and
immediately recall the associated image. As before, the use of memorable visual images and
associations will simplify the task of forming these connections. The two steps mentioned previously
are advance steps—things you do just once and can then leverage again and again in memorizing
specific decks. Once these steps are done, you’re ready for the main event: memorizing as quickly as
possible the order of fifty-two cards in a freshly shuffled deck. The method here is
straightforward. Begin your mental walk-through of your house. As you encounter each item, look at
the next card from the shuffled deck, and imagine the corresponding memorable person or thing doing
something memorable near that item. For example, if the first item and location is the mat in your
front entry, and the first card is the King of Diamonds, you might picture Donald Trump wiping mud
off of his expensive loafers on the entry mat in your front hallway. Proceed Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 131, loc. 2006-2016 The two steps mentioned
previously are advance steps—things you do just once and can then leverage again and again in
memorizing specific decks. Once these steps are done, you’re ready for the main event: memorizing as
quickly as possible the order of fifty-two cards in a freshly shuffled deck. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 132, loc. 2010-2012 The two steps mentioned
previously are advance steps—things you do just once and can then leverage again and again in
memorizing specific decks. Once these steps are done, you’re ready for the main event: memorizing as
quickly as possible the order of fifty-two cards in a freshly shuffled deck. The method here is
straightforward. Begin your mental walk-through of your house. As you encounter each item, look at
the next card from the shuffled deck, and imagine the corresponding memorable Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 132, loc. 2010-2014 The two steps
mentioned previously are advance steps—things you do just once and can then leverage again and again
in memorizing specific decks. Once these steps are done, you’re ready for the main event: memorizing
as quickly as possible the order of fifty-two cards in a freshly shuffled deck. The method here is
straightforward. Begin your mental walk-through of your house. As you encounter each item, look at
the next card from the shuffled deck, and imagine the corresponding memorable person or thing doing
something memorable near that item. For example, if the first item and location is the mat in your
front entry, and the first card is the King of Diamonds, you might picture Donald Trump wiping mud
off of his expensive loafers on the entry mat in your front hallway. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 132, loc. 2010-2016 Proceed carefully through the
rooms, associating the proper mental images with objects in the proper order. After you complete a
room, you might want to walk through it a few times in a row to lock in the imagery. Once you’re
done, you’re ready to hand the deck to a friend and amaze him by rattling off the cards in order
without peeking. To do so, of course, simply requires that you perform the mental walk-through one
more time, connecting each memorable person or thing to its corresponding card as you turn your
attention to it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 132,
loc. 2016-2020 More important than your ability to impress friends, of course, is the training such
activities provide your mind. Proceeding through the steps described earlier requires that you focus
your attention, again and again, on a clear target. Like a muscle responding to weights, this will
strengthen your general ability to concentrate—allowing you to go deeper with more ease. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 132, loc. 2022-2024 More
important than your ability to impress friends, of course, is the training such activities provide
your mind. Proceeding through the steps described earlier requires that you focus your attention,
again and again, on a clear target. Like a muscle responding to weights, this will strengthen your
general ability to concentrate—allowing you to go deeper with more ease. It’s worth emphasizing,
however, the obvious point that there’s nothing Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 132, loc. 2022-2025 there’s nothing special about card memorization. Any
structured thought process that requires unwavering attention can have a similar effect—be it
studying the Talmud, like Adam Marlin from Rule #2’s introduction, or practicing productive
meditation, or trying to learn the guitar part of a song by ear (a past favorite of mine). If card
memorization seems weird to you, in other words, then choose a replacement that makes similar
cognitive requirements. The key to this strategy is not the specifics, but instead the motivating
idea that your ability to concentrate is only as strong as your commitment to train it. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 133, loc. 2025-2029 Rule #3 Quit
Social Media Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 133, loc.
2030-2031 two important points about our culture’s current relationship with social networks like
Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, and infotainment sites like Business Insider and BuzzFeed—two
categories of online distraction that I will collectively call “network tools” in the pages ahead.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 134, loc. 2042-2044 two
important points about our culture’s current relationship with social networks like Facebook,
Twitter, and Instagram, and infotainment sites like Business Insider and BuzzFeed—two categories of
online distraction that I will collectively call “network tools” in the pages ahead. The first point
is that we increasingly recognize that these tools fragment our time and reduce our ability to
concentrate. This reality no longer generates much debate; we all feel it. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 134, loc. 2042-2046 two important points about
our culture’s current relationship with social networks like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, and
infotainment sites like Business Insider and BuzzFeed—two categories of online distraction that I
will collectively call “network tools” in the pages ahead. The first point is that we increasingly
recognize that these tools fragment our time and reduce our ability to concentrate. This reality no
longer generates much debate; we all feel it. This is a real problem for many different people, Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 134, loc. 2042-2046 two
important points about our culture’s current relationship with social networks like Facebook,
Twitter, and Instagram, and infotainment sites like Business Insider and BuzzFeed—two categories of
online distraction that I will collectively call “network tools” in the pages ahead. The first point
is that we increasingly recognize that these tools fragment our time and reduce our ability to
concentrate. This reality no longer generates much debate; we all feel it. This is a real problem
for many different people, but the problem is especially dire if you’re attempting to improve your
ability to work deeply. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
134, loc. 2042-2047 Willpower is limited, and therefore the more enticing tools you have pulling at
your attention, the harder it’ll be to maintain focus on something important. To master the art of
deep work, therefore, you must take back control of your time and attention from Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 134, loc. 2049-2050 Willpower is limited,
and therefore the more enticing tools you have pulling at your attention, the harder it’ll be to
maintain focus on something important. To master the art of deep work, therefore, you must take back
control of your time and attention from the many diversions that attempt to steal them. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 134, loc. 2049-2051 the second
important point summarized by Baratunde Thurston’s story: the impotence with which knowledge workers
currently discuss this problem of network tools and attention. Overwhelmed by these tools’ demands
on his time, Thurston felt that his only option was to (temporarily) quit the Internet altogether.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 134, loc. 2052-2054 the
second important point summarized by Baratunde Thurston’s story: the impotence with which knowledge
workers currently discuss this problem of network tools and attention. Overwhelmed by these tools’
demands on his time, Thurston felt that his only option was to (temporarily) quit the Internet
altogether. This idea that a drastic Internet sabbatical* is the only alternative to the distraction
generated by social media and infotainment has increasingly pervaded our cultural conversation. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 134, loc. 2052-2056 The
problem with this binary response to this issue is that these two choices are much too crude to be
useful. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 135, loc.
2056-2057 The problem with this binary response to this issue is that these two choices are much too
crude to be useful. The notion that you would quit the Internet is, of course, an overstuffed straw
man, infeasible for most Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 135, loc. 2056-2058 No one is meant to actually follow Baratunde Thurston’s lead—and this
reality provides justification for remaining with the only offered alternative: accepting our
current distracted state as inevitable. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 135, loc. 2058-2059 No one is meant to actually follow Baratunde Thurston’s
lead—and this reality provides justification for remaining with the only offered alternative:
accepting our current distracted state as inevitable. For all the insight and clarity that Thurston
gained during his Internet sabbatical, for example, it didn’t take him long once the experiment
ended to slide back into the fragmented state where he began. On the day when I first starting
writing this chapter, which fell only six months after Thurston’s article originally appeared in
Fast Company, the reformed connector had already sent a dozen Tweets in the few hours since he woke
up. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 135, loc. 2058-2062
This rule attempts to break us out of this rut by proposing a third Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 135, loc. 2063-2063 This rule attempts to break us
out of this rut by proposing a third option: accepting that these tools are not inherently evil, and
that some of them might be quite vital to your success and happiness, but at the same time also
accepting that the threshold for allowing a site regular access to your time and attention (not to
mention personal data) should be much more stringent, and that most people should therefore be using
many fewer such tools. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
135, loc. 2063-2066 reject the state of distracted hyperconnectedness that drove him to that drastic
experiment in the first place. There is a middle ground, and if you’re interested in developing a
deep work habit, you must fight to get there. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 135, loc. 2067-2068 benefits are minor and somewhat random. (By contrast, if
you’d instead asked someone to justify the use of, say, the World Wide Web more generally, or
e-mail, the arguments would become much more concrete and compelling.) To this observation, you
might reply that value is value: If you can find some extra benefit in using a service like
Facebook—even if it’s small—then why not use it? I call this way of thinking the any-benefit
mind-set, as it identifies any possible benefit as sufficient justification for using a network
tool. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 137, loc.
2087-2091 The Any-Benefit Approach to Network Tool Selection: You’re justified in using a network
tool if you can identify any possible benefit to its use, or anything you might possibly miss out on
if you don’t use it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
137, loc. 2092-2094 this approach, of course, is that it ignores all the negatives that come along
with the tools in question. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 137, loc. 2094-2095 this approach, of course, is that it ignores all the negatives that come
along with the tools in question. These services are engineered to be addictive—robbing time and
attention from activities that more directly support your professional and personal goals (such as
deep work). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 137, loc.
2094-2096 this approach, of course, is that it ignores all the negatives that come along with the
tools in question. These services are engineered to be addictive—robbing time and attention from
activities that more directly support your professional and personal goals (such as deep work).
Eventually, if you use these tools enough, you’ll arrive at the state of burned-out, hyperdistracted
connectivity that plagued Baratunde Thurston and millions of others like him. It’s here that we
encounter the true insidious nature of an any-benefit mind-set. The use of network tools can be
harmful. If you don’t attempt to weigh pros against cons, but instead use any glimpse of some
potential benefit as justification for unrestrained use of a tool, then you’re unwittingly crippling
your Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 137, loc.
2094-2100 this approach, of course, is that it ignores all the negatives that come along with the
tools in question. These services are engineered to be addictive—robbing time and attention from
activities that more directly support your professional and personal goals (such as deep work).
Eventually, if you use these tools enough, you’ll arrive at the state of burned-out, hyperdistracted
connectivity that plagued Baratunde Thurston and millions of others like him. It’s here that we
encounter the true insidious nature of an any-benefit mind-set. The use of network tools can be
harmful. If you don’t attempt to weigh pros against cons, but instead use any glimpse of some
potential benefit as justification for unrestrained use of a tool, then you’re unwittingly crippling
your Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 137, loc.
2094-2100 this approach, of course, is that it ignores all the negatives that come along with the
tools in question. These services are engineered to be addictive—robbing time and attention from
activities that more directly support your professional and personal goals (such as deep work).
Eventually, if you use these tools enough, you’ll arrive at the state of burned-out, hyperdistracted
connectivity that plagued Baratunde Thurston and millions of others like him. It’s here that we
encounter the true insidious nature of an any-benefit mind-set. The use of network tools can be
harmful. If you don’t attempt to weigh pros against cons, but instead use any glimpse of some
potential benefit as justification for unrestrained use of a tool, then you’re unwittingly crippling
your ability to succeed in the world of knowledge work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 137, loc. 2094-2100 In the context of network tools, we’ve become
comfortable with the any-benefit mind-set, but if we instead zoom out and consider this mind-set in
the broader context of skilled labor, it suddenly seems a bizarre and ahistorical approach to
choosing tools. In other words, once you put aside the revolutionary rhetoric surrounding all things
Internet—the sense, summarized in Part 1, that you’re either fully committed to “the revolution” or
a Luddite curmudgeon—you’ll soon realize that network tools are not exceptional; they’re tools, no
different from a blacksmith’s hammer or an artist’s brush, used by skilled laborers to do their jobs
better (and occasionally to enhance their leisure). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 137, loc. 2101-2106 In the context of network tools, we’ve become
comfortable with the any-benefit mind-set, but if we instead zoom out and consider this mind-set in
the broader context of skilled labor, it suddenly seems a bizarre and ahistorical approach to
choosing tools. In other words, once you put aside the revolutionary rhetoric surrounding all things
Internet—the sense, summarized in Part 1, that you’re either fully committed to “the revolution” or
a Luddite curmudgeon—you’ll soon realize that network tools are not exceptional; they’re tools, no
different from a blacksmith’s hammer or an artist’s brush, used by skilled laborers to do their jobs
better (and occasionally to enhance their leisure). Throughout history, skilled laborers have
applied sophistication and skepticism to their encounters with new tools and their decisions about
whether to adopt them. There’s no reason why knowledge workers cannot do the same when it comes to
the Internet—the fact that the skilled labor here now involves digital bits doesn’t change this
reality. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 137, loc.
2101-2108 The notion that identifying some benefit is sufficient to invest money, time, and
attention in a tool is near laughable to people in his trade. Of course a hay baler offers
benefits—every tool at the farm supply store has something useful to offer. At the same time, of
course it offers negatives as well. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 140, loc. 2142-2144 I propose that if you’re a knowledge worker—especially one
interested in cultivating a deep work habit—you should treat your tool selection with the same level
of care as other skilled workers, such as farmers. Following is my attempt to generalize this
assessment strategy. I call it the craftsman approach to tool selection, a name that emphasizes that
tools are ultimately aids to the larger goals of one’s craft. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 140, loc. 2146-2149 The Craftsman Approach to Tool
Selection: Identify the core factors that determine success and happiness in your professional and
personal life. Adopt a tool only if its positive impacts on these factors substantially outweigh its
negative impacts. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 141,
loc. 2150-2152 craftsman approach to tool selection stands in opposition to the any-benefit
approach. Whereas the any-benefit mind-set identifies any potential positive impact as justification
for using a tool, the craftsman variant requires that these positive impacts affect factors at the
core of what’s important to you and that they outweigh the negatives. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 141, loc. 2152-2154 the craftsman approach rejects
the simplicity of the any-benefit approach, it doesn’t ignore the benefits Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 141, loc. 2155-2155 Even though the craftsman
approach rejects the simplicity of the any-benefit approach, it doesn’t ignore the benefits Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 141, loc. 2155-2155 Even
though the craftsman approach rejects the simplicity of the any-benefit approach, it doesn’t ignore
the benefits that currently drive people to network tools, or make any advance proclamations about
what’s “good” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 141, loc.
2155-2156 Even though the craftsman approach rejects the simplicity of the any-benefit approach, it
doesn’t ignore the benefits that currently drive people to network tools, or make any advance
proclamations about what’s “good” or “bad” technology: It simply asks that you give any particular
network tool the same type of measured, nuanced accounting that tools in other trades have been
subjected to throughout the history of skilled labor. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 141, loc. 2155-2158 three strategies that follow in this rule are
designed to grow your comfort with abandoning the any-benefit mind-set and instead applying the more
thoughtful craftsman philosophy in curating the tools that lay claim to your time and attention.
This guidance is important because the craftsman approach is not cut-and-dry. Identifying what
matters most in your life, and then attempting to assess the impacts of various tools on these
factors, doesn’t reduce to a simple formula—this task requires practice and experimentation. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 141, loc. 2159-2162 The
strategies that follow provide some structure for this practice and experimentation by forcing you
to reconsider your network tools from many different angles. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 141, loc. 2162-2163 Apply the Law of the Vital Few to
Your Internet Habits Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
142, loc. 2165-2166 Gladwell, Lewis, and Packer don’t feel like the service offers them nearly
enough advantages to offset its negatives in their particular circumstances. Lewis, for example,
worries that adding more accessibility will sap his energy and reduce his ability to research and
write great stories, noting: “It’s amazing how overly accessible people are. There’s a lot of
communication in my life that’s not enriching, it’s impoverishing.” While Packer, for his part,
worries about distraction, saying: “Twitter is crack for media addicts.” He goes so far as to
describe Carr’s rave about the service as “the most frightening picture of the future that I’ve read
thus far in the new decade.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 142, loc. 2176-2181 We can instead use these decisions as a courageous illustration of
the craftsman approach to tool Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 143, loc. 2182-2183 The goal of this strategy, therefore, is to offer some structure to
this thought process—a way to reduce some of the complexity of deciding which tools really matter to
you. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 143, loc.
2187-2188 The first step of this strategy is to identify the main high-level goals in both your
professional and your personal life. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 143, loc. 2189-2190 In the professional sphere, the details of these goals
depend on what you do for a living. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 143, loc. 2191-2191 the key is to keep the list limited to what’s most
important and to keep the descriptions suitably high-level. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 144, loc. 2193-2194 When you’re done you should have a
small number of goals for both the personal and professional areas of your life. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 144, loc. 2195-2196 Once you’ve
identified these goals, list for each the two or three most important activities that help you
satisfy the goal. These activities should be specific enough to allow you to clearly picture doing
them. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 144, loc.
2196-2198 Once you’ve identified these goals, list for each the two or three most important
activities that help you satisfy the goal. These activities should be specific enough to allow you
to clearly picture doing them. On the other hand, they should be general Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 144, loc. 2196-2198 Once you’ve identified
these goals, list for each the two or three most important activities that help you satisfy the
goal. These activities should be specific enough to allow you to clearly picture doing them. On the
other hand, they should be general enough that they’re not tied to a onetime outcome. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 144, loc. 2196-2199 A good activity
in this context would be something like: “regularly read and understand the cutting-edge results in
my field.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 144, loc.
2200-2201 The next step in this strategy is to consider the network tools you currently use. For
each such tool, go through the key activities you identified and ask whether the use of the tool has
a substantially positive impact, a substantially negative impact, or little impact on your regular
and successful participation in the activity. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 144, loc. 2201-2204 The next step in this strategy is to consider the network
tools you currently use. For each such tool, go through the key activities you identified and ask
whether the use of the tool has a substantially positive impact, a substantially negative impact, or
little impact on your regular and successful participation in the activity. Now comes the important
decision: Keep using this tool only if you concluded that it has substantial positive impacts and
that these outweigh the negative impacts. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 144, loc. 2201-2205 The question once again is not whether Twitter offers some
benefits, but instead whether it offers enough benefits to offset its drag on your time and
attention (two resources that are especially valuable to a writer). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 146, loc. 2229-2231 When justifying the use of
Facebook (or similar social networks), most people cite its importance to their social lives. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 146, loc. 2234-2234 These
are real benefits that Facebook undeniably offers, but none of these benefits provide a significant
positive impact Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 147,
loc. 2246-2247 perhaps surprising but clear conclusion: Of course Facebook offers benefits to your
social life, but none are important enough to what really matters to you in this area to justify
giving it access to your time and attention. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 147, loc. 2248-2249 Facebook has many benefits to your social life; why would
one abandon it just because it doesn’t happen to help the small number of activities that we judged
most important? What’s key to understand here, however, is that this radical reduction of priorities
is not arbitrary, but is instead motivated by an idea that has arisen repeatedly in any number of
different fields, from client profitability to social equality to prevention of crashes in computer
programs. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 148, loc.
2261-2264 Facebook has many benefits to your social life; why would one abandon it just because it
doesn’t happen to help the small number of activities that we judged most important? What’s key to
understand here, however, is that this radical reduction of priorities is not arbitrary, but is
instead motivated by an idea that has arisen repeatedly in any number of different fields, Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 148, loc. 2261-2264 The Law
of the Vital Few*: In many settings, 80 percent of a given effect is due to just 20 percent of the
possible causes. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 148,
loc. 2264-2266 The Law of the Vital Few\*: In many settings, 80 percent of a given effect is due to
just 20 percent of the possible causes. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 148, loc. 2264-2266 There’s a formal mathematical underpinning to this
phenomenon (an 80/20 split is roughly what you would expect when describing a power law distribution
over impact—a type of distribution that shows up often when measuring quantities in the real world),
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 148, loc. 2268-2270
There’s a formal mathematical underpinning to this phenomenon (an 80/20 split is roughly what you
would expect when describing a power law distribution over impact—a type of distribution that shows
up often when measuring quantities in the real world), but it’s probably most useful when applied
heuristically as a reminder that, in many cases, contributions to an outcome are not evenly
distributed. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 148, loc.
2268-2271 many different activities can contribute to your achieving these Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 149, loc. 2272-2273 many different activities
can contribute to your achieving these goals. The law of the vital few, however, reminds us that the
most important 20 percent or so of these activities provide the bulk of the benefit. Assuming that
you could probably list somewhere between ten and fifteen distinct and potentially beneficial
activities for each of your life goals, this law says that it’s the top two or three such
activities—the number that this strategy asks you to focus on—that make most of the difference in
whether or not you succeed with the goal. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 149, loc. 2272-2276 It’s true that these less important activities don’t
contribute nearly as much to your goal as your top one or two, but they can provide some benefit, so
why not keep them in the mix? As long as you don’t ignore the more important activities, it seems
like it can’t hurt to also support some of the less important alternatives. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 149, loc. 2277-2279 This argument, however,
misses the key point that all activities, regardless of their importance, consume your same limited
store of time and attention. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 149, loc. 2280-2281 This argument, however, misses the key point that all activities,
regardless of their importance, consume your same limited store of time and attention. If you
service low-impact activities, therefore, you’re taking away time you could be spending on
higher-impact activities. It’s a zero-sum game. And because your time returns substantially more
rewards when invested in high-impact activities than when invested in low-impact activities, the
more of it you shift to the latter, the lower your overall benefit. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 149, loc. 2280-2283 To abandon a network tool using
this logic, therefore, is not to miss out on its potential small benefits, but is instead to get
more out of the activities you already know to yield large benefits. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 150, loc. 2288-2290 Quit Social Media Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 150, loc. 2294-2294 Stuff
accumulates in people’s lives, in part, because when faced with a specific act of elimination it’s
easy to worry, “What if I need this one day?,” and then use this worry as an excuse to keep the item
in question sitting around. Nicodemus’s packing party provided him with definitive evidence that
most of his stuff was not something he needed, and it therefore supported his quest to simplify. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 151, loc. 2303-2305 this
strategy asks that you perform the equivalent of a packing party on the social media services that
you currently use. Instead of “packing,” however, you’ll instead ban yourself from using them for
thirty days. All of them: Facebook, Instagram, Google+, Twitter, Snapchat, Vine—or whatever other
services have risen to popularity since I first wrote these words. Don’t formally deactivate these
services, and (this is important) don’t mention online that you’ll be signing off: Just stop using
them, cold turkey. If someone reaches out to you by other means and asks why your activity on a
particular service has fallen off, you can Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 151, loc. 2309-2313 this strategy asks that you perform the equivalent of a
packing party on the social media services that you currently use. Instead of “packing,” however,
you’ll instead ban yourself from using them for thirty days. All of them: Facebook, Instagram,
Google+, Twitter, Snapchat, Vine—or whatever other services have risen to popularity since I first
wrote these words. Don’t formally deactivate these services, and (this is important) don’t mention
online that you’ll be signing off: Just stop using them, cold turkey. If someone reaches out to you
by other means and asks why your activity on a particular service has fallen off, you can explain,
but don’t go out of your way to tell people. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 151, loc. 2309-2314 this strategy asks that you perform the equivalent of a
packing party on the social media services that you currently use. Instead of “packing,” however,
you’ll instead ban yourself from using them for thirty days. All of them: Facebook, Instagram,
Google+, Twitter, Snapchat, Vine—or whatever other services have risen to popularity since I first
wrote these words. Don’t formally deactivate these services, and (this is important) don’t mention
online that you’ll be signing off: Just stop using them, cold turkey. If someone reaches out to you
by other means and asks why your activity on a particular service has fallen off, you can explain,
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 151, loc. 2309-2314
this strategy asks that you perform the equivalent of a packing party on the social media services
that you currently use. Instead of “packing,” however, you’ll instead ban yourself from using them
for thirty days. All of them: Facebook, Instagram, Google+, Twitter, Snapchat, Vine—or whatever
other services have risen to popularity since I first wrote these words. Don’t formally deactivate
these services, and (this is important) don’t mention online that you’ll be signing off: Just stop
using them, cold turkey. If someone reaches out to you by other means and asks why your activity on
a particular service has fallen off, you can explain, but don’t go out of your way to tell people.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 151, loc. 2309-2314
After thirty days of this self-imposed network isolation, ask yourself the following two questions
about each of the services you temporarily quit: 1. Would the last thirty days have been notably
better if I had been able to use this service? 2. Did people care that I wasn’t using this service?
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 151, loc. 2314-2317 If
your answer is “no” to both questions, quit the service permanently. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 152, loc. 2317-2318 (You can always rejoin later.)
This strategy picks specifically on social media because among the different network tools that can
claim your time and attention, these services, if used without limit, can be particularly
devastating to your quest to work deeper. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 152, loc. 2319-2321 because among the different network tools that can claim
your time and attention, these services, if used without limit, can be particularly devastating to
your quest to work deeper. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 152, loc. 2320-2321 This strategy picks specifically on social media because among the different
network tools that can claim your time and attention, these services, if used without limit, can be
particularly devastating to your quest to work deeper. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 152, loc. 2320-2321 This strategy picks specifically on social
media because among the different network tools that can claim your time and attention, these
services, if used without limit, can be particularly devastating to your quest to work deeper. They
offer personalized information arriving on an unpredictable intermittent schedule—making them
massively addictive and therefore capable of severely damaging your attempts to schedule and succeed
with any act of concentration. Given these dangers, you might expect that more knowledge workers
would avoid these tools altogether—especially those like computer programmers or writers whose
livelihood explicitly depends on the outcome of deep work. But part of what makes social media
insidious is that the companies that profit from your attention have succeeded with a masterful
marketing coup: convincing our culture that if you don’t use their products you might miss out. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 152, loc. 2320-2326 By
spending a month without these services, you can replace your fear that you might miss out—on
events, on conversations, on shared cultural experience—with a dose of reality. For most people this
reality will confirm something that seems obvious only once you’ve done the hard work of freeing
yourself from the marketing messages surrounding these tools: They’re not really all that important
in your life. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 152, loc.
2328-2331 The reason why I ask you to not announce your thirty-day experiment is because for some
people another part of the delusion that binds them to social media is the idea that people want to
hear what you have to say, and that they might be disappointed if you suddenly leave them bereft of
your commentary. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 152,
loc. 2331-2333 earning people’s attention online is hard, hard work. Except now it’s not. Part of
what fueled social media’s rapid assent, I contend, is its ability to short-circuit this connection
between the hard work of producing real value and the positive reward of having people pay attention
to you. It has instead replaced this timeless capitalist exchange with a shallow collectivist
alternative: I’ll pay attention to what you say if you pay attention to what I say—regardless of its
value. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 153, loc.
2344-2347 The implicit agreement motivating this behavior is that in return for receiving (for the
most part, undeserved) attention from your friends and followers, you’ll return the favor by
lavishing (similarly undeserved) attention on them. You “like” my status update and I’ll “like”
yours. This agreement gives everyone a simulacrum of importance without requiring much effort in
return. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 154, loc.
2350-2352 By dropping off these services without notice you can test the reality of your status as a
content producer. For most people and most services, the news might be sobering—no one outside your
closest friends and Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
154, loc. 2353-2354 By dropping off these services without notice you can test the reality of your
status as a content producer. For most people and most services, the news might be sobering—no one
outside your closest friends and family will likely even notice you’ve signed off. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 154, loc. 2353-2355 this quest for
self-importance plays an important role in convincing people to continue to thoughtlessly fragment
their time and attention. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 154, loc. 2356-2356 for most, I suspect, the net result of this experiment, if not a massive
overhaul in your Internet habits, will be a more grounded view of the role social media plays in
your daily existence. These services aren’t necessarily, as advertised, Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 154, loc. 2358-2360 for most, I suspect, the
net result of this experiment, if not a massive overhaul in your Internet habits, will be a more
grounded view of the role social media plays in your daily existence. These services aren’t
necessarily, as advertised, the lifeblood of our modern connected world. They’re just products,
developed by private companies, funded lavishly, marketed carefully, and designed ultimately to
capture then sell your personal information and attention to advertisers. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 154, loc. 2358-2362 for most, I suspect, the
net result of this experiment, if not a massive overhaul in your Internet habits, will be a more
grounded view of the role social media plays in your daily existence. These services aren’t
necessarily, as advertised, the lifeblood of our modern connected world. They’re just products,
developed by private companies, funded lavishly, marketed carefully, and designed ultimately to
capture then sell your personal information and attention to advertisers. They can be fun, but in
the scheme of your life and what you want to accomplish, they’re a lightweight whimsy, one
unimportant distraction among many threatening to derail you from something deeper. Or maybe social
media tools are at the core of your existence. You won’t know either way until you sample life
without them. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 154, loc.
2358-2364 Don’t Use the Internet to Entertain Yourself Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 155, loc. 2364-2365 The “great and profound mistake which my
typical man makes in regard to his day,” he elaborates, is that even though he doesn’t particularly
enjoy his work (seeing it as something to “get through”), “he persists in looking upon those hours
from ten to six as ‘the day,’ to which the ten hours preceding them and the six hours following them
are nothing but a prologue and epilogue.” This is an attitude that Bennett condemns as “utterly
illogical and unhealthy.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 155, loc. 2374-2377 What’s the alternative to this state of affairs? Bennett suggests that his
typical man see his sixteen free hours as a “day within a day,” explaining, “during those sixteen
hours he is free; he is not a wage-earner; he is not preoccupied with monetary cares; he is just as
good as a man with a private income.” Accordingly, the typical man should instead use this time as
an aristocrat would: to perform rigorous self-improvement—a task that, according to Bennett,
involves, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 156, loc.
2378-2381 What’s the alternative to this state of affairs? Bennett suggests that his typical man see
his sixteen free hours as a “day within a day,” explaining, “during those sixteen hours he is free;
he is not a wage-earner; he is not preoccupied with monetary cares; he is just as good as a man with
a private income.” Accordingly, the typical man should instead use this time as an aristocrat would:
to perform rigorous self-improvement—a task that, according to Bennett, involves, primarily, reading
great literature and poetry. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 156, loc. 2378-2381 the logical foundation of his proposal, that you both should and can
make deliberate use of your time outside work, remains relevant today—especially with respect to the
goal of this rule, which is to reduce the impact of network tools on your ability to perform deep
work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 156, loc.
2388-2390 in the strategies discussed so far in this rule, we haven’t spent much time yet on a class
of network tools that are particularly relevant to the fight for depth: entertainment-focused
websites designed to capture and hold your attention for as long as possible. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 156, loc. 2391-2392 in the strategies
discussed so far in this rule, we haven’t spent much time yet on a class of network tools that are
particularly relevant to the fight for depth: entertainment-focused websites designed to capture and
hold your attention for as long as possible. At the time of this writing, the most popular examples
of such sites include the Huffington Post, BuzzFeed, Business Insider, and Reddit. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 156, loc. 2391-2393 These sites are
especially harmful after the workday is over, where the freedom in your schedule enables them to
become central to your leisure time. If you’re waiting in line, or waiting for the plot to Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 157, loc. 2399-2400 These
sites are especially harmful after the workday is over, where the freedom in your schedule enables
them to become central to your leisure time. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 157, loc. 2399-2400 they provide a cognitive crutch to ensure you eliminate
any chance of boredom. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
157, loc. 2401-2401 such behavior is dangerous, as it weakens your mind’s general ability to resist
distraction, making deep work difficult later when you really want to concentrate. To make matters
worse, these network tools are not something you join and therefore they’re not something you can
remove from your life by quitting (rendering the previous two strategies irrelevant). They’re always
available, just a quick click away. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 157, loc. 2401-2404 Arnold Bennett identified the solution to this problem a
hundred years earlier: Put more thought into your leisure time. In other words, this strategy
suggests that when it comes to your relaxation, don’t default to whatever catches your attention at
the moment, but instead dedicate some advance thinking to the question of how you want to spend your
“day within a day.” Addictive websites of the type mentioned previously thrive in a vacuum: If you
haven’t given yourself something to do in a given moment, they’ll always beckon as an appealing
option. If you instead fill this free time with something of more quality, Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 157, loc. 2405-2409 Arnold Bennett identified
the solution to this problem a hundred years earlier: Put more thought into your leisure time. In
other words, this strategy suggests that when it comes to your relaxation, don’t default to whatever
catches your attention at the moment, but instead dedicate some advance thinking to the question of
how you want to spend your “day within a day.” Addictive websites of the type mentioned previously
thrive in a vacuum: If you haven’t given yourself something to do in a given moment, they’ll always
beckon as an appealing option. If you instead fill this free time with something of more quality,
their grip on your attention will loosen. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 157, loc. 2405-2409 It’s crucial, therefore, that you figure out in advance
what you’re going to do with your evenings and weekends before they begin. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 158, loc. 2409-2410 Structured hobbies provide
good fodder for these hours, as they generate specific actions with specific goals to fill your
time. A set program of reading, à la Bennett, where you spend regular time each night making
progress on a series of deliberately chosen books, is also a good option, as is, of course, exercise
or the enjoyment of good (in-person) company. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 158, loc. 2410-2413 At this point you might worry that adding such structure
to your relaxation will defeat the purpose of relaxing, which many believe requires complete freedom
from plans or obligations. Won’t a structured evening leave you exhausted—not refreshed—the next day
at work? Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 158, loc.
2417-2419 Bennett, to his credit, anticipated this complaint. As he argues, such worries
misunderstand what energizes the human spirit: What? You say that full energy given to those sixteen
hours will lessen the value of the business eight? Not so. On the contrary, it will assuredly
increase the value of the business eight. One of the chief things which my typical man has to learn
is that the mental faculties are capable of a continuous hard activity; they do not tire like an arm
or a leg. All they want is change—not rest, except in sleep. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 158, loc. 2419-2423 Bennett, to his credit, anticipated
this complaint. As he argues, such worries misunderstand what energizes the human spirit: What? You
say that full energy given to those sixteen hours will lessen the value of the business eight? Not
so. On the contrary, it will assuredly increase the value of the business eight. One of the chief
things which my typical man has to learn is that the mental faculties are capable of a continuous
hard activity; they do not tire like an arm or a leg. All they want is change—not rest, except in
sleep. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 158, loc.
2419-2423 Bennett, to his credit, anticipated this complaint. As he argues, such worries
misunderstand what energizes the human spirit: What? You say that full energy given to those sixteen
hours will lessen the value of the business eight? Not so. On the contrary, it will assuredly
increase the value of the business eight. One of the chief things which my typical man has to learn
is that the mental faculties are capable of a continuous hard activity; they do not tire like an arm
or a leg. All they want is change—not rest, except in sleep. In my experience, this analysis is
spot-on. If you give your mind something meaningful to do throughout all your waking hours, you’ll
end the day more fulfilled, and begin the next one more relaxed, than if you instead allow your mind
to bathe for hours in semiconscious and unstructured Web surfing. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 158, loc. 2419-2425 you give your mind something
meaningful to do throughout all your waking hours, you’ll end the day more fulfilled, and begin the
next one more relaxed, than if you instead allow your mind to bathe for hours in semiconscious and
unstructured Web surfing. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 159, loc. 2423-2425 If you give your mind something meaningful to do throughout all your waking
hours, you’ll end the day more fulfilled, and begin the next one more relaxed, than if you instead
allow your mind to bathe for hours in semiconscious and unstructured Web surfing. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 159, loc. 2423-2425 To summarize, if you
want to eliminate the addictive pull of entertainment sites on your time and attention, give your
brain a quality alternative. Not only will this preserve your ability to resist distraction and
concentrate, but you might even fulfill Arnold Bennett’s ambitious goal of experiencing, perhaps for
the first time, what it means to live, and not just exist. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 159, loc. 2425-2428 Rule #4 Drain the Shallows Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 159, loc. 2429-2429 the reduction in the
37signals workweek disproportionately eliminated shallow as compared to deep work, and because the
latter was left largely untouched, the important stuff continued to get done. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 160, loc. 2449-2450 the reduction in the
37signals workweek disproportionately eliminated shallow as compared to deep work, and because the
latter was left largely untouched, the important stuff continued to get done. The shallow stuff that
can seem so urgent in the moment turned out to be unexpectedly dispensable. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 160, loc. 2449-2451 If eliminating hours of
shallow work had little impact on the results produced, what would happen if they not only
eliminated shallow work, but then replaced this newly recovered time with more deep work? Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 160, loc. 2452-2454 Fried
had always been interested in the policies of technology companies like Google that gave their
employees 20 percent of their time to work on self-directed projects. While he liked this idea, he
felt that carving one day out of an otherwise busy week was not enough to support the type of
unbroken deep work that generates true breakthroughs. “I’d take 5 days in a row over 5 days spread
out over 5 weeks,” he explained. “So our theory is that we’ll see better results when people have a
long stretch of uninterrupted time.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 161, loc. 2454-2458 “How can we afford to put our business on hold for a month
to ‘mess around’ with new ideas?” Fried asked rhetorically. “How can we afford not to?” Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 161, loc. 2466-2467 The shallow work
that increasingly dominates the time and attention of knowledge workers is less vital than it often
seems in the moment. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
161, loc. 2468-2469 The shallow work that increasingly dominates the time and attention of knowledge
workers is less vital than it often seems in the moment. For most businesses, if you eliminated
significant amounts of this shallowness, their bottom line would likely remain unaffected. And as
Jason Fried discovered, if you not only eliminate shallow work, but also replace this recovered time
with more of the deep alternative, not only will the business continue to function; it can become
more successful. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 161,
loc. 2468-2471 The strategies that follow are designed to help you ruthlessly identify the
shallowness in your current schedule, then cull it down to minimum levels—leaving more time for the
deep efforts that ultimately matter most. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 162, loc. 2472-2474 however, we should first confront the reality that there’s
a limit to this anti-shallow thinking. The value of deep work vastly outweighs the value of shallow,
but this doesn’t mean that you must quixotically pursue a schedule in which all of your time is
invested in depth. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 162,
loc. 2474-2476 however, we should first confront the reality that there’s a limit to this
anti-shallow thinking. The value of deep work vastly outweighs the value of shallow, but this
doesn’t mean that you must quixotically pursue a schedule in which all of your time is invested in
depth. For one thing, a nontrivial amount Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 162, loc. 2474-2476 however, we should first confront the reality that there’s
a limit to this anti-shallow thinking. The value of deep work vastly outweighs the value of shallow,
but this doesn’t mean that you must quixotically pursue a schedule in which all of your time is
invested in depth. For one thing, a nontrivial amount of shallow work is needed to maintain most
knowledge work jobs. You might be able to avoid checking your e-mail every ten minutes, but you
won’t likely last long if you never respond to important messages. In this sense, we should see the
goal of this rule as taming shallow work’s footprint in your schedule, not eliminating Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 162, loc. 2474-2479 however, we
should first confront the reality that there’s a limit to this anti-shallow thinking. The value of
deep work vastly outweighs the value of shallow, but this doesn’t mean that you must quixotically
pursue a schedule in which all of your time is invested in depth. For one thing, a nontrivial amount
of shallow work is needed to maintain most knowledge work jobs. You might be able to avoid checking
your e-mail every ten minutes, but you won’t likely last long if you never respond to important
messages. In this sense, we should see the goal of this rule as taming shallow work’s footprint in
your schedule, not eliminating it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 162, loc. 2474-2479 however, we should first confront the reality that there’s a limit to
this anti-shallow thinking. The value of deep work vastly outweighs the value of shallow, but this
doesn’t mean that you must quixotically pursue a schedule in which all of your time is invested in
depth. For one thing, a nontrivial amount of shallow work is needed to maintain most knowledge work
jobs. You might be able to avoid checking your e-mail every ten minutes, but you won’t likely last
long if you never respond to important messages. In this sense, we should see the goal of this rule
as taming shallow work’s footprint in your schedule, not eliminating it. Then there’s the issue of
cognitive capacity. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
162, loc. 2474-2479 however, we should first confront the reality that there’s a limit to this
anti-shallow thinking. The value of deep work vastly outweighs the value of shallow, but this
doesn’t mean that you must quixotically pursue a schedule in which all of your time is invested in
depth. For one thing, a nontrivial amount of shallow work is needed to maintain most knowledge work
jobs. You might be able to avoid checking your e-mail every ten minutes, but you won’t likely last
long if you never respond to important messages. In this sense, we should see the goal of this rule
as taming shallow work’s footprint in your schedule, not eliminating Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 162, loc. 2474-2479 however, we should first confront
the reality that there’s a limit to this anti-shallow thinking. The value of deep work vastly
outweighs the value of shallow, but this doesn’t mean that you must quixotically pursue a schedule
in which all of your time is invested in depth. For one thing, a nontrivial amount of shallow work
is needed to maintain most knowledge work jobs. You might be able to avoid checking your e-mail
every ten minutes, but you won’t likely last long if you never respond to important messages. In
this sense, we should see the goal of this rule as taming shallow work’s footprint in your schedule,
not eliminating it. Then there’s the issue of cognitive capacity. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 162, loc. 2474-2479 however, we should first confront the
reality that there’s a limit to this anti-shallow thinking. The value of deep work vastly outweighs
the value of shallow, but this doesn’t mean that you must quixotically pursue a schedule in which
all of your time is invested in depth. For one thing, a nontrivial amount of shallow work is needed
to maintain most knowledge work jobs. You might be able to avoid checking your e-mail every ten
minutes, but you won’t likely last long if you never respond to important messages. In this sense,
we should see the goal of this rule as taming shallow work’s footprint in your schedule, not
eliminating it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 162,
loc. 2474-2479 Then there’s the issue of cognitive capacity. Deep work is exhausting because it
pushes you toward the limit of your abilities. Performance psychologists have extensively studied
how much such efforts can be sustained by an individual in a given Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 162, loc. 2479-2481 Then there’s the issue of cognitive
capacity. Deep work is exhausting because it pushes you toward the limit of your abilities.
Performance psychologists have extensively studied how much such efforts can be sustained by an
individual in a given day. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 162, loc. 2479-2481 Anders Ericsson and his collaborators survey these studies. They note that
for someone new to such practice (citing, in particular, a child in the early stages of developing
an expert-level skill), an hour a day is a reasonable limit. For those familiar with the rigors of
such activities, the limit expands to something like four hours, but rarely more. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 162, loc. 2482-2484 The implication is
that once you’ve hit your deep work limit in a given day, you’ll experience diminishing rewards if
you try to cram in more. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 162, loc. 2484-2485 The implication is that once you’ve hit your deep work limit in a given day,
you’ll experience diminishing rewards if you try to cram in more. Shallow work, therefore, doesn’t
become dangerous until after you add enough to begin to crowd out your bounded deep efforts for the
day. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 162, loc.
2484-2486 this caveat might seem optimistic. The typical workday is eight hours. The most adept deep
thinker cannot spend more than four of these hours in a state of true depth. It follows that you can
safely spend half the day wallowing in the shallows without adverse effect. The danger missed by
this analysis is how easily this amount of time can be consumed, especially once you consider the
impact of meetings, appointments, calls, and other scheduled events. For many jobs, these time
drains can leave you with surprisingly little time left for solo work. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 163, loc. 2486-2490 Put another way, even though
we’re not capable of spending a full day in a state of blissful depth, this reality shouldn’t reduce
the urgency of reducing shallow work, as the typical knowledge workday Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 163, loc. 2495-2496 Put another way, even though
we’re not capable of spending a full day in a state of blissful depth, this reality shouldn’t reduce
the urgency of reducing shallow work, as the typical knowledge workday is more easily fragmented
than many suspect. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 163,
loc. 2495-2496 treat shallow work with suspicion because its damage is often vastly underestimated
and its importance vastly overestimated. This type of work is inevitable, but you must keep it
confined to a point where it doesn’t impede your ability to take full advantage of the deeper
efforts that ultimately determine your impact. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 163, loc. 2497-2499 strategies that follow will help you act on this
reality. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 163, loc.
2499-2500 Schedule Every Minute of Your Day Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 164, loc. 2500-2500 spend somewhere between fifteen and sixteen hours per week
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 164, loc. 2503-2503
This bad estimate of time usage is not unique to British television watching. When you consider
different groups self-estimating different behaviors, similar gaps stubbornly remain. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 164, loc. 2507-2508 Americans think
they’re sleeping, on average, somewhere around seven hours a night. The American Time Use Survey,
which has people actually measure their sleep, corrected this number to 8.6 hours. Another study
found that people who claimed to work sixty to sixty-four hours per week were actually averaging
more like forty-four hours per week, while those claiming to work more than seventy-five hours were
actually working less than fifty-five. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 164, loc. 2510-2513 We spend much of our day on autopilot—not giving much
thought to what we’re doing with our time. This is a problem. It’s difficult to prevent the trivial
from creeping into every corner of your schedule if you don’t face, without flinching, your current
balance between deep and shallow work, and then adopt the habit of pausing before action and asking,
“What makes the most sense right now?” The strategy described in the following paragraphs is
designed to force you into these behaviors. It’s an idea that might seem extreme at first but will
soon prove indispensable in your quest to take full advantage of the value of deep work: Schedule
every minute of your day. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 164, loc. 2513-2518 At the beginning of each workday, turn to a new page of lined paper in a
notebook you dedicate to this purpose. Down the left-hand side of the page, mark every other line
with an hour of the day, covering the full set of hours you typically work. Now comes the important
part: Divide the hours of your workday into blocks and assign activities to the blocks. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 165, loc. 2519-2522 At the beginning
of each workday, turn to a new page of lined paper in a notebook you dedicate to this purpose. Down
the left-hand side of the page, mark every other line with an hour of the day, covering the full set
of hours you typically work. Now comes the important part: Divide the hours of your workday into
blocks and assign activities to the blocks. For example, you might block off nine a.m. to eleven
a.m. for writing a client’s Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 165, loc. 2519-2522 At the beginning of each workday, turn to a new page of lined paper in a
notebook you dedicate to this purpose. Down the left-hand side of the page, mark every other line
with an hour of the day, covering the full set of hours you typically work. Now comes the important
part: Divide the hours of your workday into blocks and assign activities to the blocks. For example,
you might block off nine a.m. to eleven a.m. for writing a client’s press release. To do so,
actually draw a box that covers the lines corresponding to these hours, then write “press release”
inside the box. Not every block need be dedicated to a work task. There might be time blocks for
lunch or relaxation breaks. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 165, loc. 2519-2524 At the beginning of each workday, turn to a new page of lined paper in a
notebook you dedicate to this purpose. Down the left-hand side of the page, mark every other line
with an hour of the day, covering the full set of hours you typically work. Now comes the important
part: Divide the hours of your workday into blocks and assign activities to the blocks. For example,
you might block off nine a.m. to eleven a.m. for writing a client’s press release. To do so,
actually draw a box that covers the lines corresponding to these hours, then write “press release”
inside the box. Not every block need be dedicated to a work task. There might be time blocks for
lunch or relaxation breaks. To keep things reasonably clean, the minimum length of a block should be
thirty minutes (i.e., one line on your page). This means, for example, that instead of having a
unique small box for each small task on your plate for the day—respond to boss’s e-mail, submit
reimbursement form, ask Carl about report—you can batch similar things into more generic task
blocks. You might find it useful, in this case, to draw a line from a task block to the open
right-hand side of the page where you can list out the full set of small tasks you plan to
accomplish in that block. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 165, loc. 2519-2528 When you’re done scheduling your day, every minute should be part of a
block. You have, in effect, given every minute of your workday a job. Now as you go through your
day, use this schedule to guide you. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 165, loc. 2528-2529 Two things can (and likely will) go wrong with your
schedule once the day progresses. The first is that your estimates will prove wrong. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 165, loc. 2530-2531 The second
problem is that you’ll be interrupted and new obligations will unexpectedly appear on your plate.
These events will also break your schedule. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 166, loc. 2532-2533 The second problem is that you’ll be interrupted and new
obligations will unexpectedly appear on your plate. These events will also break your schedule. This
is okay. If your schedule is disrupted, you should, at the next available moment, take a few minutes
to create a revised schedule for the time that remains in the day. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 166, loc. 2532-2535 The second problem is that you’ll be
interrupted and new obligations will unexpectedly appear on your plate. These events will also break
your schedule. This is okay. If your schedule is disrupted, you should, at the next available
moment, take a few minutes to create a revised schedule for the time that remains in the day. You
can turn to a new page. You can erase and redraw blocks. Or do as I do: Cross out the blocks for the
remainder of the day and create new blocks to the right of the old ones on the page (I draw my
blocks skinny so I have room for several revisions). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 166, loc. 2532-2536 The second problem is that you’ll be
interrupted and new obligations will unexpectedly appear on your plate. These events will also break
your schedule. This is okay. If your schedule is disrupted, you should, at the next available
moment, take a few minutes to create a revised schedule for the time that remains in the day. You
can turn to a new page. You can erase and redraw blocks. Or do as I do: Cross out the blocks for the
remainder of the day and create new blocks to the right of the old ones on the page (I draw my
blocks skinny so I have room for several revisions). On some days, you might rewrite your schedule
half a dozen times. Don’t despair if this happens. Your goal is not to stick to a given schedule at
all costs; it’s instead to maintain, at all times, a thoughtful say in what you’re doing with your
time going forward—even if these decisions are reworked again and again as the day unfolds. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 166, loc. 2532-2539 If you
find that schedule revisions become overwhelming in their frequency, there are a few tactics that
can inject some more stability. First, you should recognize that almost definitely you’re going to
underestimate at first how much time you require for most things. When people are new to this habit,
they tend to use their schedule as an incarnation of wishful thinking—a best-case scenario for their
day. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 166, loc.
2539-2542 If you find that schedule revisions become overwhelming in their frequency, there are a
few tactics that can inject some more stability. First, you should recognize that almost definitely
you’re going to underestimate at first how much time you require for most things. When people are
new to this habit, they tend to use their schedule as an incarnation of wishful thinking—a best-case
scenario for their day. Over time, you should make an effort to accurately (if not somewhat
conservatively) predict the time tasks will require. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 166, loc. 2539-2542 The second tactic that helps is the use of
overflow conditional blocks. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 166, loc. 2543-2543 The second tactic that helps is the use of overflow conditional
blocks. If you’re not sure how long a given activity might take, block off the expected time, then
follow this with an additional block that has a split purpose. If you need more time for the
preceding activity, use this additional block to keep working on it. If you finish the activity on
time, however, have an alternate use already assigned for the extra block (for example, some
nonurgent tasks). This allows unpredictability in your day without requiring you to keep changing
your schedule on paper. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
166, loc. 2543-2547 The second tactic that helps is the use of overflow conditional blocks. If
you’re not sure how long a given activity might take, block off the expected time, then follow this
with an additional block that has a split purpose. If you need more time for the preceding activity,
use this additional block to keep working on it. If you finish the activity on time, however, have
an alternate use already assigned for the extra block (for example, some nonurgent tasks). This
allows unpredictability in your day without requiring you to keep changing your schedule on paper.
For example, returning to our press release example, you might schedule two hours for writing the
press release, but then follow it by an additional hour block that you can use to keep writing the
release, if needed, but otherwise assign to catching up with e-mail. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 166, loc. 2543-2548 The third tactic I suggest is to
be liberal with your use of task blocks. Deploy many throughout your day and make them longer than
required to handle the tasks you plan in the morning. Lots of things come up during the typical
knowledge worker’s day: Having regularly occurring blocks of time to address these surprises keeps
things running smoothly. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 167, loc. 2549-2551 a common objection. In my experience pitching the values of daily schedules,
I’ve found that many people worry that this level of planning will become burdensomely restrictive.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 167, loc. 2553-2554 In
my own daily scheduling discipline, in addition to regularly scheduling significant blocks of time
for speculative thinking and discussion, I maintain a rule that if I stumble onto an important
insight, then this is a perfectly valid reason to ignore the rest of my schedule for the day (with
the exception, of course, of things that cannot be skipped). I can then stick with this unexpected
insight until it loses steam. At this point, I’ll step back and rebuild my schedule for any time
that remains in the day. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 167, loc. 2559-2562 I not only allow spontaneity in my schedule; I encourage it. Joseph’s
critique is driven by the mistaken idea Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 168, loc. 2563-2563 I not only allow spontaneity in my schedule; I encourage
it. Joseph’s critique is driven by the mistaken idea that the goal of a schedule is to force your
behavior into a rigid plan. This type of scheduling, however, isn’t about constraint—it’s instead
about thoughtfulness. It’s a simple habit that forces you to continually take a moment throughout
your day and ask: “What makes sense for me to do with the time that remains?” It’s the habit of
asking that returns results, not your unyielding fidelity to the answer. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 168, loc. 2563-2566 someone following this
combination of comprehensive scheduling and a willingness to adapt or modify the plan as needed will
likely experience more creative insights than someone who adopts a more traditionally “spontaneous”
approach where the day is left open and unstructured. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 168, loc. 2567-2569 someone following this combination of
comprehensive scheduling and a willingness to adapt or modify the plan as needed will likely
experience more creative insights than someone who adopts a more traditionally “spontaneous”
approach where the day is left open and unstructured. Without structure, it’s easy to allow your
time to devolve into the shallow—e-mail, social media, Web surfing. This type of shallow behavior,
though satisfying in the moment, is not conducive to creativity. With structure, on the other hand,
you can ensure that you regularly schedule blocks to grapple with a new idea, or work deeply on
something challenging, or brainstorm for a fixed period—the type of commitment more likely to
instigate innovation. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
168, loc. 2567-2572 rituals followed by many great creative thinkers.) And because you’re willing to
abandon your plan when an innovative idea arises, you’re just as well suited as the distracted
creative to follow up when the muse strikes. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 168, loc. 2572-2574 To summarize, the motivation for this strategy is the
recognition that a deep work habit requires you to treat your time with respect. A good first step
toward this respectful handling is the advice outlined here: Decide in advance what you’re going to
do with every minute of your workday. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 168, loc. 2575-2577 To summarize, the motivation for this strategy is the
recognition that a deep work habit requires you to treat your time with respect. A good first step
toward this respectful handling is the advice outlined here: Decide in advance what you’re going to
do with every minute of your workday. It’s natural, at first, to resist this idea, as it’s
undoubtedly easier to continue to allow the twin forces of internal whim and external requests to
drive your schedule. But you must overcome this distrust of structure if you want to approach your
true potential as someone who creates things that matter. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 168, loc. 2575-2579 Quantify the Depth of Every Activity Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 169, loc. 2579-2580 An
advantage of scheduling your day is that you can determine how much time you’re actually spending in
shallow activities. Extracting this insight from your schedules, however, can become tricky in
practice, as it’s not always clear exactly how shallow you should consider a given task. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 169, loc. 2580-2582 Shallow
Work: Noncognitively demanding, logistical-style tasks, often performed while distracted. These
efforts tend not to create much new value in the world and are easy to replicate. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 169, loc. 2583-2585 The purpose of this
strategy is to give you an accurate metric for resolving such ambiguity—providing you with a way to
make clear and consistent decisions about where given work tasks fall on the shallow-to-deep scale.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 169, loc. 2592-2593
evaluate activities by asking a simple (but surprisingly illuminating) question: How long would it
take (in months) to train a smart recent college graduate with no specialized training in my field
to complete this task? Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
170, loc. 2593-2595 If our hypothetical college graduate requires many months of training to
replicate a task, then this indicates that the task leverages hard-won expertise. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 171, loc. 2619-2620 tasks that leverage
your expertise tend to be deep tasks and they can therefore provide a double benefit: They return
more value per time spent, and they stretch your abilities, leading to improvement. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 171, loc. 2620-2622 tasks that
leverage your expertise tend to be deep tasks and they can therefore provide a double benefit: They
return more value per time spent, and they stretch your abilities, leading to improvement. On the
other hand, a task that our hypothetical college graduate can pick up quickly is one that does not
leverage expertise, and therefore it can be understood as shallow. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 171, loc. 2620-2623 Once you know where your activities
fall on the deep-to-shallow scale, bias your time toward the former. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 172, loc. 2623-2624 strategies that follow, which
will provide specific guidance on how to accomplish this tricky goal. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 172, loc. 2628-2628 Ask Your Boss for a Shallow Work
Budget Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 172, loc.
2629-2629 What percentage of my time should be spent on shallow work? This strategy suggests that
you ask it. If you have a boss, in other words, have a conversation about this question. (You’ll
probably have to first define for him or her what “shallow” and “deep” work means.) If you work for
yourself, ask yourself this question. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 172, loc. 2630-2632 settle on a specific answer. Then—and this is the
important part—try to stick to this budget. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 172, loc. 2632-2633 For most people in most non-entry-level knowledge work
jobs, the answer to the question will be somewhere in the 30 to 50 percent range (there’s a
psychological distaste surrounding the idea of spending the majority of your time on unskilled
tasks, so 50 percent is a natural upper Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 172, loc. 2634-2636 For most people in most non-entry-level knowledge work
jobs, the answer to the question will be somewhere in the 30 to 50 percent range (there’s a
psychological distaste surrounding the idea of spending the majority of your time on unskilled
tasks, so 50 percent is a natural upper limit, while at the same time most bosses will begin to
worry that if this percentage gets too much lower than 30 percent you’ll be reduced to a knowledge
work hermit who thinks big thoughts but never responds to e-mails). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 172, loc. 2634-2637 Obeying this budget will likely
require changes to your behavior. You’ll almost certainly end up forced into saying no to projects
that seem infused with shallowness while also more aggressively reducing the amount of shallowness
in your existing projects. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 172, loc. 2637-2639 This budget might lead you to drop the need for a weekly status meeting in
preference for results-driven reporting (“let me know when you’ve made significant progress; then
we’ll talk”). It might also lead you to start spending more mornings in communication isolation or
decide it’s not as important as you once thought to respond quickly and in detail to every cc’d
e-mail that crosses your inbox. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 173, loc. 2639-2642 These changes are all positive for your quest to make deep work
central to your working life. On the one hand, they don’t ask you to abandon your core shallow
obligations—a move that would cause problems and resentment—as you’re still spending a lot of time
on such efforts. On the other hand, they do force you to place a hard limit on the amount of less
urgent obligations you allow to slip insidiously into your schedule. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 173, loc. 2642-2645 These changes are all positive
for your quest to make deep work central to your working life. On the one hand, they don’t ask you
to abandon your core shallow obligations—a move that would cause problems and resentment—as you’re
still spending a lot of time on such efforts. On the other hand, they do force you to place a hard
limit on the amount of less urgent obligations you allow to slip insidiously into your schedule.
This limit frees up space for significant amounts of deep effort on a consistent basis. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 173, loc. 2642-2646 these decisions
should start with a conversation with your boss is that this agreement establishes implicit support
from your workplace. If you work for someone else, this strategy provides cover when you turn down
an obligation or restructure a project to minimize shallowness. You can justify the move because
it’s necessary for you to hit your prescribed target mix of work types. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 173, loc. 2646-2649 The reason why these
decisions should start with a conversation with your boss is that this agreement establishes
implicit support from your workplace. If you work for someone else, this strategy provides cover
when you turn down an obligation or restructure a project to minimize shallowness. You can justify
the move because it’s necessary for you to hit your prescribed target mix of work types. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 173, loc. 2646-2649 part of
the reason shallow work persists in large quantities in knowledge work is that we rarely see the
total impact of such efforts on our schedules. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 173, loc. 2649-2650 part of the reason shallow work persists in large
quantities in knowledge work is that we rarely see the total impact of such efforts on our
schedules. We instead tend to evaluate these behaviors one by one in the moment—a perspective from
which each task can seem quite reasonable and convenient. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 173, loc. 2649-2651 part of the reason shallow work persists in
large quantities in knowledge work is that we rarely see the total impact of such efforts on our
schedules. We instead tend to evaluate these behaviors one by one in the moment—a perspective from
which each task can seem quite reasonable and convenient. The tools from earlier in this rule,
however, allow you to make this impact explicit. You can now confidently say to your boss, “This is
the exact percentage of my time spent last week on shallow work,” and force him or her to give
explicit approval for that ratio. Faced with these numbers, and the economic reality they clarify
(it’s incredibly wasteful, for example, to pay a highly trained professional to send e-mail messages
and attend meetings for thirty hours a week), a boss will be led to the natural conclusion that you
need to say no to some things and to streamline others—even if this makes life less convenient for
the boss, or for you, or for your coworkers. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 173, loc. 2649-2656 a business’s goal is to generate value, not to make sure
its employees’ lives are as easy as possible. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 174, loc. 2656-2656 If you work for yourself, this exercise will force you to
confront the reality of how little time in your “busy” schedule you’re actually producing value.
These hard numbers will provide you the confidence Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 174, loc. 2657-2658 If you work for yourself, this exercise will force
you to confront the reality of how little time in your “busy” schedule you’re actually producing
value. These hard numbers will provide you the confidence needed to start scaling back on the
shallow activities that are sapping your time. Without these numbers, it’s difficult for an
entrepreneur to say no to any opportunity that might generate some positive return. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 174, loc. 2657-2660 when considered
in isolation, to say no to any one of these activities seems like you’re being lazy. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 174, loc. 2661-2661 By instead
picking and sticking with a shallow-to-deep ratio, you can replace this guilt-driven unconditional
acceptance with the more healthy habit of trying to get the most out of the time you put aside for
shallow work (therefore still exposing yourself to many opportunities), but keeping these efforts
constrained to a small enough fraction of your time and attention to enable the deep work that
ultimately drives your business forward. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 174, loc. 2661-2664 there’s always the possibility that when you ask this
question the answer is stark. No boss will explicitly answer, “One hundred percent of your time
should be shallow!” (unless you’re entry level, at which point you need to delay this exercise until
you’ve built enough skills to add deep efforts to your official work responsibilities), Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 174, loc. 2665-2667 there’s always
the possibility that when you ask this question the answer is stark. No boss will explicitly answer,
“One hundred percent of your time should be shallow!” (unless you’re entry level, at which point you
need to delay this exercise until you’ve built enough skills to add deep efforts to your official
work responsibilities), but a boss might reply, in so many words, “as much shallow work as is needed
for you to promptly do whatever we need from you at the moment.” In this case, the answer is still
useful, as it tells you that this isn’t a job that supports deep work, and a job that doesn’t
support deep work is not a job that can help you succeed in our current information economy. You
should, in this case, thank the boss for the feedback, and then promptly start planning how you can
transition into a new position that values depth. Finish Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 174, loc. 2665-2671 there’s always the possibility that when you
ask this question the answer is stark. No boss will explicitly answer, “One hundred percent of your
time should be shallow!” (unless you’re entry level, at which point you need to delay this exercise
until you’ve built enough skills to add deep efforts to your official work responsibilities), but a
boss might reply, in so many words, “as much shallow work as is needed for you to promptly do
whatever we need from you at the moment.” In this case, the answer is still useful, as it tells you
that this isn’t a job that supports deep work, and a job that doesn’t support deep work is not a job
that can help you succeed in our current information economy. You should, in this case, thank the
boss for the feedback, and then promptly start planning how you can transition into a new position
that values depth. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 174,
loc. 2665-2671 Finish Your Work by Five Thirty Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 175, loc. 2671-2671 fixed-schedule productivity, as I fix the firm goal of
not working past a certain time, then work backward to find productivity strategies that allow me to
satisfy this declaration. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 175, loc. 2675-2677 set drastic quotas on the major sources of shallow endeavors in her academic
life. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 177, loc.
2704-2705 a commitment to ruthlessly capping the shallow while protecting the deep efforts—that is,
original research—that ultimately determined her professional fate. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 177, loc. 2710-2712 incredibly cautious about my use
of the most dangerous word in one’s productivity vocabulary: “yes.” It takes a lot to convince me to
agree to something that yields shallow work. If you ask for my involvement in university business
that’s not absolutely necessary, I might respond with a defense I learned from the department chair
who hired me: “Talk to me after tenure.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 177, loc. 2713-2715 be clear in my refusal but ambiguous in my explanation for
the refusal. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 178, loc.
2716-2716 be clear in my refusal but ambiguous in my explanation for the refusal. The key is to
avoid providing enough specificity about the excuse that the requester has the opportunity to defuse
it. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 178, loc. 2716-2717
“Sounds interesting, but I can’t make it due to schedule conflicts.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 178, loc. 2719-2719 In turning down obligations, I
also resist the urge to offer a consolation prize that ends up devouring almost as much of my
schedule (e.g., “Sorry I can’t join your committee, but I’m happy to take a look at some of your
proposals as they come together and offer my thoughts”). A clean break is best. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 178, loc. 2719-2721 incredibly
conscientious about managing my time. Because my time is limited each day, I cannot afford to allow
a large deadline to creep up on me, or a morning to be wasted on something trivial, because I didn’t
take a moment to craft a smart plan. The Damoclean cap on the workday enforced by fixed-schedule
productivity has a way of keeping my organization efforts sharp. Without this looming cutoff, I’d
likely end up more lax in my habits. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 178, loc. 2722-2725 Nagpal and I can both succeed in academia without
Tom-style overload due to two reasons. First, we’re asymmetric in the culling forced by our
fixed-schedule commitment. By ruthlessly reducing the shallow while preserving the deep, this
strategy frees up our time without diminishing the amount of new value we generate. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 178, loc. 2726-2728 the reduction in
shallow frees up more energy for the deep alternative, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 178, loc. 2728-2729 the reduction in shallow frees up more energy
for the deep alternative, allowing us to produce more than if we had defaulted to a more typical
crowded schedule. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 178,
loc. 2728-2729 Second, the limits to our time necessitate more careful thinking about our
organizational habits, also leading to more value produced as compared to longer but less organized
schedules. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 178, loc.
2729-2730 In most knowledge work jobs, it can be difficult in the moment to turn down a shallow
commitment that seems harmless in isolation—be it accepting an invitation to get coffee or agreeing
to “jump on a Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 179, loc.
2732-2733 In most knowledge work jobs, it can be difficult in the moment to turn down a shallow
commitment that seems harmless in isolation—be it accepting an invitation to get coffee or agreeing
to “jump on a call.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
179, loc. 2732-2734 A commitment to fixed-schedule productivity, however, shifts you into a scarcity
mind-set. Suddenly any obligation beyond your deepest efforts is suspect and seen as potentially
disruptive. Your default answer becomes no, the bar for gaining access to your time and attention
rises precipitously, and you begin to Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 179, loc. 2734-2736 A commitment to fixed-schedule productivity, however,
shifts you into a scarcity mind-set. Suddenly any obligation beyond your deepest efforts is suspect
and seen as potentially disruptive. Your default answer becomes no, the bar for gaining access to
your time and attention rises precipitously, and you begin to organize the efforts that pass these
obstacles with a ruthless efficiency. It might also lead you to test assumptions about your
company’s work culture that you thought were ironclad but turn out to be malleable. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 179, loc. 2734-2737 It’s common, for
example, to receive e-mails from your boss after hours. Fixed-schedule productivity would have you
ignore these messages until the next morning. Many suspect that this would cause problems, as such
responses are expected, but in many cases, the fact that your boss happens to be clearing her inbox
at night doesn’t mean that she expects an immediate response—a lesson this strategy would soon help
you discover. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 179, loc.
2737-2740 Fixed-schedule productivity, in other words, is a meta-habit that’s simple to adopt but
broad in its impact. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
179, loc. 2740-2741 Fixed-schedule productivity, in other words, is a meta-habit that’s simple to
adopt but broad in its impact. If you have to choose just one behavior that reorients your focus
toward the deep, this one should be high on your list of possibilities. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 179, loc. 2740-2742 Become Hard to Reach Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 180, loc. 2746-2746 No
discussion of shallow work is complete without considering e-mail. This quintessential shallow
activity is particularly insidious in its grip on most knowledge workers’ attention, as it delivers
a steady stream of distractions addressed specifically to you. Ubiquitous e-mail access has become
so ingrained in our professional habits that we’re beginning to lose the sense that we have any say
in its role in our life. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 180, loc. 2747-2750 Freeman warns in his 2009 book, The Tyranny of E-mail, with the rise of this
technology “we are slowly eroding our ability to explain—in a careful, complex way—why it is so
wrong for us to complain, resist, or redesign our workdays so that they are manageable.” E-mail
seems a fait accompli. Resistance is futile. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 180, loc. 2750-2752 Just because you cannot avoid this tool altogether doesn’t
mean you have to cede all authority over its role in your mental landscape. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 180, loc. 2752-2753 Tip #1: Make People Who
Send Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 180, loc.
2756-2756 Tip #1: Make People Who Send You E-mail Do More Work Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 180, loc. 2756-2757 If you want to reach me, I offer only
a special-purpose e-mail address that comes with conditions and a lowered expectation that I’ll
respond: If you have an offer, opportunity, or introduction that might make my life more
interesting, e-mail me at interesting [at] calnewport.com. For the reasons stated above, I’ll only
respond to those proposals that are a good match for my schedule and interests. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 181, loc. 2762-2765 sender filter, as I’m
asking my correspondents to filter themselves before attempting to contact me. This filter has
significantly reduced the time I spend in my inbox. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 181, loc. 2765-2767 this approach a sender filter, as I’m asking
my correspondents to filter themselves before attempting to contact me. This filter has
significantly reduced the time I spend in my inbox. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 181, loc. 2765-2767 Another benefit of a sender filter is that it
resets expectations. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
181, loc. 2773-2774 Another benefit of a sender filter is that it resets expectations. The most
crucial line in my description is the following: “I’ll only respond to those proposals that are a
good match for my schedule and interests.” This seems minor, but it makes a substantial difference
in how my correspondents think about their messages to me. The default social convention surrounding
e-mail is that unless you’re famous, if someone sends you something, you owe him or her a response.
For most, therefore, an inbox full of messages generates a major sense of obligation. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 181, loc. 2773-2777 instead
resetting your correspondents’ expectations to the reality that you’ll probably not respond, the
experience is transformed. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 182, loc. 2778-2779 By instead resetting your correspondents’ expectations to the reality that
you’ll probably not respond, the experience is transformed. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 182, loc. 2778-2779 By instead resetting your
correspondents’ expectations to the reality that you’ll probably not respond, the experience is
transformed. The inbox is now a collection of opportunities that you can glance at when you have the
free time—seeking out those that make sense for you to engage. But the pile of unread messages no
longer generates a sense of obligation. You could, if you wanted to, ignore them all, and nothing
bad would Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 182, loc.
2778-2780 By instead resetting your correspondents’ expectations to the reality that you’ll probably
not respond, the experience is transformed. The inbox is now a collection of opportunities that you
can glance at when you have the free time—seeking out those that make sense for you to engage. But
the pile of unread messages no longer generates a sense of obligation. You could, if you wanted to,
ignore them all, and nothing bad would happen. Psychologically, this can be freeing. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 182, loc. 2778-2781 I worried when I
first began using a sender filter that it would seem pretentious—as if my time was more valuable
than that of my readers—and that it would upset people. But this fear wasn’t realized. Most people
easily accept the idea that you have a right to control your own incoming communication, as they
would like to enjoy this same right. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 182, loc. 2781-2784 I worried when I first began using a sender filter that it
would seem pretentious—as if my time was more valuable than that of my readers—and that it would
upset people. But this fear wasn’t realized. Most people easily accept the idea that you have a
right to control your own incoming communication, as they would like to enjoy this same right. More
important, people appreciate clarity. Most are okay to not receive a response if they don’t expect
one (in general, those with a minor public presence, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 182, loc. 2781-2785 I worried when I first began using a sender
filter that it would seem pretentious—as if my time was more valuable than that of my readers—and
that it would upset people. But this fear wasn’t realized. Most people easily accept the idea that
you have a right to control your own incoming communication, as they would like to enjoy this same
right. More important, people appreciate clarity. Most are okay to not receive a response if they
don’t expect one (in general, those with a minor public presence, such as authors, overestimate how
much people really care about their replies to their messages). Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 182, loc. 2781-2785 this expectation reset might even
earn you more credit when you do respond. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 182, loc. 2786-2786 My particular sender filter is just one example of this
general strategy. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 182,
loc. 2791-2791 “At some point, the number of people reaching out exceeded [Herbert’s] capacity, so
he created filters that put the onus on the person asking for help.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 183, loc. 2793-2794 Herbert’s filters ended up taking
a different form. To contact him, you must first consult an FAQ to make sure your question has not
already been answered (which was the case for a lot of the messages Herbert was processing before
his filters were in place). If you make it through this FAQ sieve, he then asks you to fill out a
survey that allows him to further screen for connections that seem particularly relevant to his
expertise. For those who make it past this step, Herbert enforces a small fee you must pay before
communicating with him. This fee is not about making extra money, but is instead about selecting for
individuals who are serious about receiving and acting on advice. Herbert’s filters still enable him
to help people and encounter interesting opportunities. But at the same time, they have reduced his
incoming communication to a level he can easily handle. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 183, loc. 2795-2800 the technologies underlying e-mail are
transformative, but the current social conventions guiding how we apply this technology are
underdeveloped. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 184,
loc. 2810-2811 the technologies underlying e-mail are transformative, but the current social
conventions guiding how we apply this technology are underdeveloped. The notion that all messages,
regardless of purpose or sender, arrive in the same undifferentiated inbox, and that there’s an
expectation that every message deserves a (timely) Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 184, loc. 2810-2812 the technologies underlying e-mail are
transformative, but the current social conventions guiding how we apply this technology are
underdeveloped. The notion that all messages, regardless of purpose or sender, arrive in the same
undifferentiated inbox, and that there’s an expectation that every message deserves a (timely)
response, is absurdly unproductive. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 184, loc. 2810-2812 Tip #2: Do More Work When You Send or Reply to E-mails Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 184, loc. 2817-2818 These
three examples should be familiar to most knowledge workers, as they’re representative of many of
the messages that fill their inboxes. They’re also potential productivity land mines: How you
respond to them will have a significant impact on how much time and attention the resulting
conversation ultimately consumes. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 185, loc. 2822-2825 interrogative e-mails like these generate an initial instinct to dash
off the quickest possible response that will clear the message—temporarily—out of your inbox. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 185, loc. 2825-2826
interrogative e-mails like these generate an initial instinct to dash off the quickest possible
response that will clear the message—temporarily—out of your inbox. A quick response will, in the
short term, provide you with some minor relief because you’re bouncing the responsibility implied by
the message off your court and back onto the sender’s. This relief, however, is short-lived, as this
responsibility will continue to bounce back again and again, Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 185, loc. 2825-2828 interrogative e-mails like these
generate an initial instinct to dash off the quickest possible response that will clear the
message—temporarily—out of your inbox. A quick response will, in the short term, provide you with
some minor relief because you’re bouncing the responsibility implied by the message off your court
and back onto the sender’s. This relief, however, is short-lived, as this responsibility will
continue to bounce back again and again, continually sapping your time and attention. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 185, loc. 2825-2828 interrogative
e-mails like these generate an initial instinct to dash off the quickest possible response that will
clear the message—temporarily—out of your inbox. A quick response will, in the short term, provide
you with some minor relief because you’re bouncing the responsibility implied by the message off
your court and back onto the sender’s. This relief, however, is short-lived, as this responsibility
will continue to bounce back again and again, continually sapping your time and attention. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 185, loc. 2825-2828
interrogative e-mails like these generate an initial instinct to dash off the quickest possible
response that will clear the message—temporarily—out of your inbox. A quick response will, in the
short term, provide you with some minor relief because you’re bouncing the responsibility implied by
the message off your court and back onto the sender’s. This relief, however, is short-lived, as this
responsibility will continue to bounce back again and again, continually sapping your time and
attention. I suggest, therefore, that the right strategy when faced with a question of this type is
to pause a moment before replying and take the time to answer the following key prompt: What is the
project represented by this message, and what is the most efficient (in terms of messages generated)
process for bringing this project to a successful conclusion? Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 185, loc. 2825-2831 the right strategy when faced with a
question of this type is to pause a moment before replying and take the time to answer the following
key prompt: What is the project represented by this message, and what is the most efficient (in
terms of messages generated) process for bringing this project to a successful conclusion? Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 185, loc. 2829-2831 Once
you’ve answered this question for yourself, replace a quick response with one that takes the time to
describe the process you identified, points out the current step, and emphasizes the step that comes
next. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 185, loc.
2832-2833 Once you’ve answered this question for yourself, replace a quick response with one that
takes the time to describe the process you identified, points out the current step, and emphasizes
the step that comes next. I call this the process-centric approach to e-mail, and it’s designed to
minimize both the number of e-mails you receive and the amount of mental clutter they generate. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 185, loc. 2832-2834 In
crafting these sample responses, I started by identifying the project implied by the message.
Notice, the word “project” is used loosely here. It can cover things that are large and obviously
projects, such as making progress on a research problem (Example #2), but it applies just as easily
to small logistical challenges like setting up a coffee meeting (Example Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 186, loc. 2851-2853 In crafting these sample
responses, I started by identifying the project implied by the message. Notice, the word “project”
is used loosely here. It can cover things that are large and obviously projects, such as making
progress on a research problem (Example #2), but it applies just as easily to small logistical
challenges like setting up a coffee meeting (Example #1). I then took a minute or two to think
through a process that gets us from the current state to a desired outcome with a minimum of
messages required. The final step was to write a reply that clearly describes this process and where
we stand. These examples centered on an e-mail reply, but it should be clear that a similar approach
also works when writing an e-mail message from scratch. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 186, loc. 2851-2856 The process-centric approach to e-mail can
significantly mitigate the impact of this technology on your time and attention. There are two
reasons for this effect. First, it reduces the number of e-mails in your inbox—sometimes
significantly (something as simple as scheduling a coffee meeting can easily spiral into half a
dozen or more messages over a period of many days, if you’re not careful about your replies). Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 187, loc. 2856-2859 The
process-centric approach to e-mail can significantly mitigate the impact of this technology on your
time and attention. There are two reasons for this effect. First, it reduces the number of e-mails
in your inbox—sometimes significantly (something as simple as scheduling a coffee meeting can easily
spiral into half a dozen or more messages over a period of many days, if you’re not careful about
your replies). This, in turn, reduces the time you spend in your inbox and reduces the brainpower
you must expend when you do. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World, pg. 187, loc. 2856-2860 Second, to steal terminology from David Allen, a good process-centric
message immediately “closes the loop” with respect to the project at hand. When a project is
initiated by an e-mail that you send or receive, it squats in your mental landscape—becoming
something that’s “on your plate” in the sense that Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 187, loc. 2860-2862 Second, to steal terminology from David Allen, a good
process-centric message immediately “closes the loop” with respect to the project at hand. When a
project is initiated by an e-mail that you send or receive, it squats in your mental
landscape—becoming something that’s “on your plate” in the sense that it has been brought to your
attention and eventually needs to be addressed. This method closes this open loop as soon as it
forms. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 187, loc.
2860-2863 Second, to steal terminology from David Allen, a good process-centric message immediately
“closes the loop” with respect to the project at hand. When a project is initiated by an e-mail that
you send or receive, it squats in your mental landscape—becoming something that’s “on your plate” in
the sense that it has been brought to your attention and eventually needs to be addressed. Cal
Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 187, loc. 2860-2863 This
method closes this open loop as soon as it forms. By working through the whole process, adding to
your task lists and calendar any relevant commitments on your part, and bringing the other party up
to speed, your mind can reclaim the mental real estate the project once demanded. Less mental
clutter means more mental resources available for deep thinking. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 187, loc. 2863-2865 Process-centric e-mails might not
seem natural at first. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg.
187, loc. 2865-2866 they require that you spend more time thinking about your messages before you
compose them. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 187, loc.
2866-2867 this might seem like you’re spending more time on e-mail. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 187, loc. 2867-2867 the extra two to three minutes
you spend at this point will save you many more minutes reading and responding to unnecessary extra
messages later. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 187,
loc. 2867-2868 The other issue is that process-centric messages can seem stilted and overly
technical. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc.
2869-2869 The other issue is that process-centric messages can seem stilted and overly technical.
The current social conventions surrounding e-mail promote a conversational tone that Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc. 2869-2870 The current
social conventions surrounding e-mail promote a conversational tone that clashes with the more
systematic schedules or decision trees commonly used in process-centric communication. If this
concerns you, I suggest that you add a longer conversational preamble to your messages. You can even
separate the process-centric portion of the message from the conversational opening with a divider
line, or label it “Proposed Next Steps,” so that its technical tone seems more appropriate in
context. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc.
2869-2873 The other issue is that process-centric messages can seem stilted and overly technical.
The current social conventions surrounding e-mail promote a conversational tone that clashes with
the more systematic schedules or decision trees commonly used in process-centric communication. If
this concerns you, I suggest that you add a longer conversational preamble to your messages. You can
even separate the process-centric portion of the message from the conversational opening with a
divider line, or label it “Proposed Next Steps,” so that its technical tone seems more appropriate
in context. In the end, these minor hassles are worth it. By putting more thought up front into
what’s really being proposed by the e-mail messages that flit in and out of your inbox, you’ll
greatly reduce the negative impact of this technology on your ability to do work that actually
matters. Tip #3: Don’t Respond As a graduate student at MIT, I had the opportunity to interact with
famous academics. In doing so, I noticed that many shared a fascinating and somewhat rare approach
to e-mail: Their default behavior when receiving an e-mail message is to not respond. Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc. 2869-2878 The other issue
is that process-centric messages can seem stilted and overly technical. The current social
conventions surrounding e-mail promote a conversational tone that clashes with the more systematic
schedules or decision trees commonly used in process-centric communication. If this concerns you, I
suggest that you add a longer conversational preamble to your messages. You can even separate the
process-centric portion of the message from the conversational opening with a divider line, or label
it “Proposed Next Steps,” so that its technical tone seems more appropriate in context. In the end,
these minor hassles are worth it. By putting more thought up front into what’s really being proposed
by the e-mail messages that flit in and out of your inbox, you’ll greatly reduce the negative impact
of this technology on your ability to do work that actually matters. Tip #3: Don’t Respond As a
graduate student at MIT, I had the opportunity to interact with famous academics. In doing so, I
noticed that many shared a fascinating and somewhat rare approach to e-mail: Their default behavior
when receiving an e-mail message is to not respond. Over time, I learned the philosophy driving this
behavior: When it comes to e-mail, they believed, it’s the sender’s responsibility to convince the
receiver that a reply is worthwhile. If you didn’t make a convincing case and sufficiently minimize
the effort required by the professor to respond, you didn’t get a response. For example, the
following e-mail would likely not generate a reply with many of the famous names at the Institute:
Hi professor. I’d love to stop by sometime to talk about <topic X>. Are you available? Responding to
this message requires too much work (“Are you available?” is too vague to be answered quickly).
Also, there’s no attempt to argue that this chat is worth the professor’s time. With these critiques
in mind, here’s a version of the same message that would be more likely to generate a reply: Hi
professor. I’m working on a project similar to <topic X> with my advisor, <professor Y>. Is it okay
if I stop by in the last fifteen minutes of your office hours on Thursday to explain what we’re up
to in more detail and see if it might complement your current project? Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc. 2869-2887 In the end, these minor hassles
are worth it. By putting more thought up front into what’s really being proposed by the e-mail
messages that flit in and out of your inbox, you’ll greatly reduce the negative impact of this
technology on your ability to do work that actually matters. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc. 2873-2875 Tip #3: Don’t Respond Cal Newport,
Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc. 2875-2876 As a graduate
student at MIT, I had the opportunity to interact with famous academics. In doing so, I noticed that
many shared a fascinating and somewhat rare approach to e-mail: Their default behavior when
receiving an e-mail message is to not respond. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in
a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc. 2876-2878 the philosophy driving this behavior: When it comes to
e-mail, they believed, it’s the sender’s responsibility to convince the receiver that a reply is
worthwhile. If you didn’t make a convincing case and sufficiently minimize the effort required by
the professor to respond, you didn’t get a response. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 188, loc. 2878-2881 Responding to this message requires too much
work (“Are you available?” is too vague to be answered quickly). Also, there’s no attempt to argue
that this chat is worth the professor’s time. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 188, loc. 2883-2884 makes a clear case for why this meeting makes sense and
minimizes the effort needed from the receiver to respond. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused
Success in a Distracted World, pg. 189, loc. 2888-2889 This tip asks that you replicate, to the
extent feasible in your professional context, this professorial ambivalence to e-mail. To help you
in this effort, try applying the following three rules to sort through which messages require a
response and which do not. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 189, loc. 2889-2891 Professorial E-mail Sorting: Do not reply to an e-mail message if any of the
following applies: • It’s ambiguous or otherwise makes it hard for you to generate a reasonable
response. • It’s not a question or proposal that interests you. • Nothing really good would happen
if you did respond and nothing really bad would happen if you didn’t. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 189, loc. 2891-2895 become way more ruthless when
deciding whether or not to click “reply.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 189, loc. 2897-2897 This tip can be uncomfortable at first because it will
cause you to break a key convention currently surrounding e-mail: Replies are assumed, regardless of
the relevance or appropriateness of the message. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 189, loc. 2898-2899 no way to avoid that some bad things will happen if
you take this approach. At the minimum, some people might get confused or upset—especially if
they’ve never seen standard e-mail conventions questioned or ignored. Here’s the thing: This is
okay. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 190, loc.
2899-2901 Tim Ferriss once wrote: “Develop the habit of letting small bad things happen. If you
don’t, you’ll never find time for the life-changing big things.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 190, loc. 2901-2902 people are quick to adjust their
expectations to the specifics of your communication habits. The fact you didn’t respond to their
hastily scribed messages is probably not a central event in their lives. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 190, loc. 2903-2904 Once you get past the
discomfort of this approach, you’ll begin to experience its rewards. There are two common tropes
bandied around when people discuss solutions to e-mail overload. One says that sending e-mails
generates more e-mails, while the other says that wrestling with ambiguous or irrelevant e-mails is
a major source of inbox-related stress. The approach suggested here responds aggressively to both
issues—you send fewer e-mails and ignore those that aren’t easy to process—and by doing so will
significantly weaken the grip your inbox maintains over your time and attention. Cal Newport, Deep
Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 190, loc. 2904-2908 “The one trait that
differentiated [Gates from Allen] was focus. Allen’s mind would flit between many ideas and
passions, but Gates was a serial obsessor.” Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 191, loc. 2919-2920 It’s here, in this story of Gates’s obsessive focus, that
we encounter the strongest form of my argument for deep work. It’s easy, amid the turbulence of a
rapidly evolving information age, to default to dialectical grumbling. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules
for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 191, loc. 2920-2921 The curmudgeons among us are
vaguely uneasy about the attention people pay to their phones, and pine for the days of unhurried
concentration, while the digital hipsters equate such nostalgia with Luddism and boredom, and
believe that increased connection is the foundation for a utopian future. Cal Newport, Deep Work:
Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 191, loc. 2921-2923 Marshall McLuhan declared
that “the medium is the message,” but our current conversation on these topics seems to imply that
“the medium is morality”—either you’re on board with the Facebook future or see it as our downfall.
Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 191, loc. 2923-2925 A
commitment to deep work is not a moral stance and it’s not a philosophical statement—it is instead a
pragmatic recognition that the ability to concentrate is a skill that gets valuable things done.
Deep work is important, in other words, not because distraction is evil, but because it enabled Bill
Gates to start a billion-dollar industry in less than a semester. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 191, loc. 2926-2928 Deep work is way more powerful than
most people understand. It’s a commitment to this skill that allowed Bill Gates to make the most of
an unexpected opportunity to create a new industry, and that allowed me to double my academic
productivity the same year I decided to concurrently write a book. To leave the distracted masses to
join the focused few, I’m arguing, is a transformative experience. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for
Focused Success in a Distracted World, pg. 194, loc. 2975-2978 The deep life, of course, is not for
everybody. It requires hard work and drastic changes to your habits. For many, there’s a comfort in
the artificial busyness of rapid e-mail messaging and social media posturing, while the deep life
demands that you leave much of that behind. There’s also an uneasiness that surrounds any effort to
produce the best things you’re capable of producing, as this forces you to confront the possibility
that your best is not (yet) that good. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 195, loc. 2978-2981 The deep life, of course, is not for everybody. It
requires hard work and drastic changes to your habits. For many, there’s a comfort in the artificial
busyness of rapid e-mail messaging and social media posturing, while the deep life demands that you
leave much of that behind. There’s also an uneasiness that surrounds any effort to produce the best
things you’re capable of producing, as this forces you to confront the possibility that your best is
not (yet) that good. It’s safer to comment on our culture than to step into the Rooseveltian ring
and attempt to wrestle it into something better. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success
in a Distracted World, pg. 195, loc. 2978-2982 But if you’re willing to sidestep these comforts and
fears, and instead struggle to deploy your mind to its fullest capacity to create things that
matter, then you’ll discover, as others have before you, that depth generates a life rich with
productivity and meaning. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted World,
pg. 195, loc. 2982-2984 In Part 1, I quoted writer Winifred Gallagher saying, “I’ll live the focused
life, because it’s the best kind there is.” I agree. So does Bill Gates. And hopefully now that
you’ve finished this book, you agree too. Cal Newport, Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a
Distracted World, pg. 195, loc. 2984-2986
